In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was
upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters.
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the
light from the darkness.
And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called
Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the
waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were
under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmame and it was so.
And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the
morning were the second day.
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry land appe and it
was so.
And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together
of the waters called he Se and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his
kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the ear and it was so.
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed
after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in
itself, after his ki and God saw that it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the third day.
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the
heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for
signs, and for seasons, and for days, and yea
And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to
give light upon the ear and it was so.
And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the nig he made the stars
also.
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth,
And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the
light from the darkne and God saw that it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth
in the open firmament of heaven.
And God created great whales, and every living creature that
moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their
kind, and every winged fowl after his ki and God saw that
it was good.
And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the
earth.
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature
after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the
earth after his ki and it was so.
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle
after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth
after his ki and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likene and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over
all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth.
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him; male and female created he them.
And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue  and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing
seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree,
in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it
shall be for meat.
And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air,
and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there
is life, I have given every green herb for me and it was
so.
And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host
of them.
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made;
and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he
had made.
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because
that in it he had rested from all his work which God created
and made.
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth
and the heavens,
And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and
every herb of the field before it gr for the LORD God had
not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man
to till the ground.
But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole
face of the ground.
And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became
a living soul.
And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there
he put the man whom he had formed.
And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree
that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of
life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from
thence it was parted, and became into four heads.
The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth
the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the
onyx stone.
And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is
Euphrates.
And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of
Eden to dress it and to keep it.
And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of
the garden thou mayest freely e
But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt
not eat of  for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die.
And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him.
And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the
field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam
to see what he would call th and whatsoever Adam called
every living creature, that was the name thereof.
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not
found an help meet for him.
And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he
sle and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh
instead thereof;
And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a
woman, and brought her unto the man.
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
fle she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of
Man.
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and
shall cleave unto his wife and they shall be one flesh.
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed.
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field
which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea,
hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the gard
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall
ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good
and evil.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to
make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and
gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made
themselves aprons.
And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden
in the cool of the d and Adam and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the
garden.
And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where
art thou?
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.
And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou
eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou
shouldest not eat?
And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou
hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I
did eat.
And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast
of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt
thou eat all the days of thy li
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shalt bruise his heel.
Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and
thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and
thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee.
And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the
voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I
commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of  cursed is
the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all
the days of thy life;
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and
thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou
return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou tak for
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.
And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the
mother of all living.
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of
skins, and clothed them.
And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us,
to know good and ev and now, lest he put forth his hand,
and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ev
Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden,
to till the ground from whence he was taken.
So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the
garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned
every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.
And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain,
and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.
And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of
sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of
the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and
of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to
his offeri
But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain
was very wroth, and his countenance fell.
And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is
thy countenance fallen?
If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou
doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be
his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.
And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass,
when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel
his brother, and slew him.
And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he
said, I know n Am I my brother's keeper?
And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's
blood crieth unto me from the ground.
And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her
mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield
unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou
be in the earth.
And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I
can bear.
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the
earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a
fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to
pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.
And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a
mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.
And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in
the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and
he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the
name of his son, Enoch.
And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and
Mehujael begat Methusa and Methusael begat Lamech.
And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was
Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.
And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in
tents, and of such as have cattle.
And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all
such as handle the harp and organ.
And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructor of every
artificer in brass and ir and the sister of Tubalcain was
Naamah.
And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my
voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my spee for I have
slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and
sevenfold.
And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called
his name Se For God, said she, hath appointed me another
seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.
And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called
his name En then began men to call upon the name of the
LORD.
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that
God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;
Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called
their name Adam, in the day when they were created.
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in
his own likeness, and after his image; and called his name
Se
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight
hundred yea and he begat sons and daughters:
And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty
yea and he died.
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:
And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven
years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years:
and he died.
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:
And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen
years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and
he died.
And Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel:
And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and
forty years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years:
and he died.
And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:
And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and
thirty years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and
five yea and he died.
And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat
Eno
And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and
begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two
yea and he died.
And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:
And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three
hundred years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five
yea
And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.
And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and
begat Lamech.
And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred
eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and
nine yea and he died.
And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a
s
And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort
us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the
ground which the LORD hath cursed.
And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and
five years, and begat sons and daughte
And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and
seven yea and he died.
And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham,
and Japheth.
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of
the earth, and daughters were born unto them,
That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were
fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.
And the LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man,
for that he also is fle yet his days shall be an hundred
and twenty years.
There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after
that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men,
and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men
which were of old, men of renown.
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually.
And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart.
And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from
the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping
thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I
have made them.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.
These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and
perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.
And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was
filled with violence.
And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt;
for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before
me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and,
behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The
length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth
of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the
side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou
make it.
And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the
earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life,
from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall
die.
But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt
come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy
sons' wives with thee.
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort
shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee;
they shall be male and female.
Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every
sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.
And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou
shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee,
and for them.
Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did
he.
And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into
the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this
generation.
Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the
male and his fema and of beasts that are not clean by two,
the male and his female.
Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female;
to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I
have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters
was upon the earth.
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the
flood.
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of
fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,
There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and
the female, as God had commanded Noah.
And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the
fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of
heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and
Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three
wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after
their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every
bird of every sort.
And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.
And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh,
as God had commanded h and the LORD shut him in.
And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the
earth.
And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the
earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all
the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were
covered.
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the
mountains were covered.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl,
and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth, and every m
All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was
in the dry land, died.
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the
face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping
things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed
from the ear and Noah only remained alive, and they that
were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the a and God made a wind to
pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were
stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;
And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and
after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were
abated.
And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth
day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in
the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops
of the mountains seen.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened
the window of the ark which he had ma
And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until
the waters were dried up from off the earth.
Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground;
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she
returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the
face of the whole ear then he put forth his hand, and took
her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth
the dove out of the ark;
And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her
mouth was an olive leaf pluckt o so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth.
And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in
the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were
dried up from off the ear and Noah removed the covering of
the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was
dry.
And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, was the earth dried.
And God spake unto Noah, saying,
Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy
sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of
all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed
abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon
the earth.
And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with h
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and
whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went
forth out of the ark.
And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every
clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt
offerings on the altar.
And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his
heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's
sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living,
as I have done.
While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not
cease.
And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every
beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all
that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the
sea; into your hand are they delivered.
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as
the green herb have I given you all things.
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
shall ye not eat.
And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the
hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man;
at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of
man.
Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
for in the image of God made he man.
And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly
in the earth, and multiply therein.
And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your
seed after you;
And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl,
of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from
all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.
And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither
shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you,
for perpetual generatio
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a
covenant between me and the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the
earth, that the bow shall be seen in the clo
And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you
and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall
no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it,
that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and
every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant,
which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon
the earth.
And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem,
and Ham, and Japhe and Ham is the father of Canaan.
These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole
earth overspread.
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was
uncovered within his tent.
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his
father, and told his two brethren without.
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both
their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness
of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw
not their father's nakedness.
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son
had done unto him.
And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he
be unto his brethren.
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall
be his servant.
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of
Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years:
and he died.
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham,
and Japhe and unto them were sons born after the flood.
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and
Dodanim.
By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their
lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in
their nations.
And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and
Raamah, and Sabtech and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and
Dedan.
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the
earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said,
Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and
the city Rehoboth, and Calah,
And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.
And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and
Naphtuhim,
And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and
Caphtorim.
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth,
And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and
afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.
And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou
comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and
Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their
tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.
Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the
brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.
The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud,
and Aram.
And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg;
for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name
was Joktan.
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and
Jerah,
And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of
Joktan.
And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a
mount of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their
generations, in their natio and by these were the nations
divided in the earth after the flood.
And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that
they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt
there.
And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and
burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime
had they for morter.
And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower,
whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name,
lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which
the children of men builded.
And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have
all one language; and this they begin to  and now nothing
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another's speech.
So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of
all the ear and they left off to build the city.
Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did
there confound the language of all the ear and from thence
did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth.
These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years
old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flo
And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters.
And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:
And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three
years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:
And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three
years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:
And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty
years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:
And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years,
and begat sons and daughters.
And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:
And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven
years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:
And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters.
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen
years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and
Haran.
Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram,
Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.
And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his
nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife
was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter
of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
But Sarai was barren; she had no child.
And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his
son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's
wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees,
to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and
dwelt there.
And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and
Terah died in Haran.
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country,
and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land
that I will shew th
And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessi
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
curseth th and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed.
So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot
went with h and Abram was seventy and five years old when
he departed out of Haran.
And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and
all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that
they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the
land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.
And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem,
unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the
land.
And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will
I give this la and there builded he an altar unto the LORD,
who appeared unto him.
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of
Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and
Hai on the ea and there he builded an altar unto the LORD,
and called upon the name of the LORD.
And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.
And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into
Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the
land.
And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into
Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know
that thou art a fair woman to look up
Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see
thee, that they shall say, This is his wife and they will
kill me, but they will save thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with
me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.
And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the
Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.
The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before
Phara and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep,
and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and
she asses, and camels.
And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of Sarai Abram's wife.
And Pharaoh called Abram and said, What is this that thou hast
done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy
wife?
Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her
to me to wife now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go
thy way.
And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent
him away, and his wife, and all that he had.
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that
he had, and Lot with him, into the south.
And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel,
unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning,
between Bethel and Hai;
Unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the
fir and there Abram called on the name of the LORD.
And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds,
and tents.
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell
togeth for their substance was great, so that they could
not dwell together.
And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle
and the herdmen of Lot's catt and the Canaanite and the
Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen;
for we be brethren.
Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray
thee, from  if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go
to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will
go to the left.
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of
Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the LORD
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the LORD,
like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.
Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed
ea and they separated themselves the one from the other.
Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the
cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD
exceedingly.
And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated
from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place
where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and
westwa
For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and
to thy seed for ever.
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if
a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed
also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the
breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.
Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain
of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto
the LORD.
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar,
Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal
king of nations;
That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha
king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is
the salt sea.
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth
year they rebelled.
And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings
that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth
Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh
Kiriathaim,
And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by
the wilderness.
And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and
smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the
Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of
Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and
the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle
with them in the vale of Siddim;
With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of
nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of
Ellasar; four kings with five.
And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of
Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that
remained fled to the mountain.
And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all
their victuals, and went their way.
And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom,
and his goods, and departed.
And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the
Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite,
brother of Eshcol, and brother of An and these were
confederate with Abram.
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three
hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by
night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is
on the left hand of Damascus.
And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the
people.
And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return
from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were
with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.
And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine:
and he was the priest of the most high God.
And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most
high God, possessor of heaven and ear
And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine
enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.
And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons,
and take the goods to thyself.
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand
unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and
earth,
That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and
that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou
shouldest say, I have made Abram ri
Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion
of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let
them take their portion.
After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a
vision, saying, Fear not, Abr I am thy shield, and thy
exceeding great reward.
And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go
childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of
Damascus?
And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and,
lo, one born in my house is mine heir.
And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This
shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of
thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number th
and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for
righteousness.
And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of
Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
And he said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall
inherit it?
And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years
old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.
And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst,
and laid each piece one against anoth but the birds divided
he not.
And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove
them away.
And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram;
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.
And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall
be a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve
them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;
And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and
afterward shall they come out with great substance.
And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be
buried in a good old age.
But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.
And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was
dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed
between those pieces.
In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying,
Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt
unto the great river, the river Euphrat
The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and
the Jebusites.
Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an
handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath
restrained me from beari I pray thee, go in unto my maid;
it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram
hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after
Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her
to her husband Abram to be his wife.
And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw
that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given
my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had
conceived, I was despised in her ey the LORD judge between
me and thee.
But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand;
do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly
with her, she fled from her face.
And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in
the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and
whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my
mistress Sarai.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy
mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy
seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with
child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael;
because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.
And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man,
and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the
presence of all his brethren.
And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou
God seest  for she said, Have I also here looked after him
that seeth me?
Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is
between Kadesh and Bered.
And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name,
which Hagar bare, Ishmael.
And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare
Ishmael to Abram.
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God;
walk before me, and be thou perfect.
And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.
And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be
a father of many nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name
shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made
thee.
And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make
nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting
covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the
land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for
an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant
therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.
This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you
and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be
circumcised.
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it
shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the
house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of
thy seed.
He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcis and my covenant shall be in
your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people;
he hath broken my covenant.
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt
not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.
And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of
people shall be of her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years
old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before
thee!
And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and
thou shalt call his name Isa and I will establish my
covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his
seed after him.
And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him
exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make
him a great nation.
But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
And he left off talking with him, and God went up from
Abraham.
And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in
his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male
among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of
their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his
son.
And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought
with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.
And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he
sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;
And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood
by h and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the
tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,
And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight,
pass not away, I pray thee, from thy serva
Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your
feet, and rest yourselves under the tr
And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your
hearts; after that ye shall pass  for therefore are ye come
to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make
cakes upon the hearth.
And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and
good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had
dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under
the tree, and they did eat.
And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said,
Behold, in the tent.
And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to
the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son.
And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and
it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am
waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?
And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh,
saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?
Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I
will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and
Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid.
And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.
And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and
Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which
I do;
Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty
nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him?
For I know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD,
to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon
Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great, and because their sin is very grievous;
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not,
I will know.
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward
Sod but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.
And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?
Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt
thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty
righteous that are therein?
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wick and that the righteous should be as
the wicked, that be far from th Shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right?
And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within
the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon
me to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ash
Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous:
wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said,
If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.
And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there
shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for
forty's sake.
And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will
spe Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he
said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto
the LO Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And
he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.
And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak
yet but this on Peradventure ten shall be found there. And
he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake.
And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing
with Abrah and Abraham returned unto his place.
And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the
gate of Sod and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and
he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;
And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into
your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet,
and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they
said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him,
and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did
bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of
Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the
people from every quart
And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men
which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that
we may know them.
And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door
after him,
And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let
me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as
is good in your ey only unto these men do nothing; for
therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one
fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a jud now
will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed
sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the
house to them, and shut to the door.
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness, both small and gre so that they wearied
themselves to find the door.
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in
law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast
in the city, bring them out of this pla
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is
waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath
sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which
married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this
place; for the LORD will destroy this city. But he seemed as
one that mocked unto his sons in law.
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot,
saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are
here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and
upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two
daughters; the LORD being merciful unto h and they brought
him forth, and set him without the city.
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad,
that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee,
neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain,
lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD:
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and
thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me
in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest
some evil take me, and I d
Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little
o Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and
my soul shall live.
And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning
this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the
which thou hast spoken.
Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou
be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called
Zoar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone
and fire from the LORD out of heaven;
And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the
inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the
ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.
And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the LO
And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the
land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the
country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the
plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the
midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the
which Lot dwelt.
And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and
his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zo
and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old,
and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after
the manner of all the ear
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with
him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night: and the
firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived
not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said
unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my fath
let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in,
and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the
younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she
lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their
father.
And the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab: the
same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.
And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name
Benam the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto
this day.
And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country,
and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and
Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to
him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou
hast taken; for she is a man's wife.
But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt
thou slay also a righteous nation?
Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she
herself said, He is my broth in the integrity of my heart
and innocency of my hands have I done this.
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst
this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee
from sinning against  therefore suffered I thee not to
touch her.
Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet,
and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt li and if thou
restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou,
and all that are thine.
Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all
his servants, and told all these things in their ea and the
men were sore afraid.
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast
thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou
hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast
done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou
hast done this thing?
And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is
not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.
And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my
wife.
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my
father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness
which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall
come, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him
Sarah his wife.
And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell
where it pleaseth thee.
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silv behold, he is to thee a covering of
the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all oth
thus she was reproved.
So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.
For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.
And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did
unto Sarah as he had spoken.
For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which God had spoken to him.
And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as
God had commanded him.
And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was
born unto him.
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that
hear will laugh with me.
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah
should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in
his old age.
And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great
feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had
born unto Abraham, mocking.
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and
her s for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with
my son, even with Isaac.
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of
his son.
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that
Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in
Isaac shall thy seed be called.
And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation,
because he is thy seed.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and
a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her
shoulder, and the child, and sent her aw and she departed,
and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.
And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way
off, as it were a bow sh for she said, Let me not see the
death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up
her voice, and wept.
And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God
called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth
thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad
where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will
make him a great nation.
And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad
drink.
And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took
him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol
the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God
is with thee in all that thou doe
Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not
deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's s
but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou
shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water,
which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.
And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing;
neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to
day.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe
lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my
hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged
this well.
Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they
sware both of them.
Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose
up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they
returned into the land of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on
the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.
And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt
Abraham, and said unto him, Abrah and he said, Behold, here
I am.
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him
there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I
will tell thee of.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and
clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went
unto the place of which God had told him.
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the
ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come
again to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a
knife; and they went both of them together.
And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father:
and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire
and the wo but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for
a burnt offeri so they went both of them together.
And they came to the place which God had told him of; and
Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and
bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to
slay his son.
And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and
said, Abraham, Abrah and he said, Here am I.
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
any thing unto h for now I know that thou fearest God,
seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind
him a ram caught in a thicket by his hor and Abraham went
and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in
the stead of his son.
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it
is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be
seen.
And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven
the second time,
And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because
thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,
thine only s
That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand
which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies;
And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
because thou hast obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and
went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
And it came to pass after these things, that it was told
Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children
unto thy brother Nahor;
Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father
of Aram,
And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to
Nahor, Abraham's brother.
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah,
and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these
were the years of the life of Sarah.
And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land
of Cana and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep
for her.
And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the
sons of Heth, saying,
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession
of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my
sight.
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,
Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the
choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall
withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury
thy dead.
And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the
land, even to the children of Heth.
And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I
should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for
me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath,
which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is
worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace
amongst you.
And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the
Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of
Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city,
saying,
Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave
that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons
of my people give I it th bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the
land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear 
I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I
will bury my dead there.
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,
My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred
shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury
therefore thy dead.
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to
Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the
sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money
with the merchant.
And the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was
before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and
all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the
borders round about, were made sure
Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.
And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of
the field of Machpelah before Mam the same is Hebron in the
land of Canaan.
And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure
unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of
Heth.
And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD
had blessed Abraham in all things.
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that
ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under
my thi
And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and
the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my
son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwe
But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take
a wife unto my son Isaac.
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not
be willing to follow me unto this la must I needs bring thy
son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my
son thither again.
The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house,
and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and
that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this
land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take
a wife unto my son from thence.
And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from this my oa only bring not my son
thither again.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his
master, and sware to him concerning that matter.
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master,
and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his
ha and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of
Nahor.
And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a
well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that
women go out to draw water.
And he said O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send
me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master
Abraham.
Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters
of the men of the city come out to draw wat
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say,
Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she
shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink al let
the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant
Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness
unto my master.
And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that,
behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of
Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher
upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither
had any man known h and she went down to the well, and
filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray
thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw
water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and
ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his
camels.
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether
the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.
And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the
man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two
bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;
And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is
there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of
Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodge in.
And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who
hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his tru
I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my
master's brethren.
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.
And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban
ran out unto the man, unto the well.
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets
upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of
Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that
he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at
the well.
And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore
standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room
for the camels.
And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels,
and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash
his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.
And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will
not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.
And he said, I am Abraham's servant.
And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become
gre and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver,
and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and
asses.
And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she
was o and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a
wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose
land I dwe
But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife unto my son.
And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not
follow me.
And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send
his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take
a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's hou
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest
to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be
clear from my oath.
And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my
master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I 
Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to
pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I
say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy
pitcher to drink;
And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for
thy came let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath
appointed out for my master's son.
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah
came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down
unto the well, and drew wat and I said unto her, Let me
drink, I pray thee.
And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her
shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink
al so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she
said, the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare
unto h and I put the earring upon her face, and the
bracelets upon her hands.
And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed
the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the
right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.
And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or
to the left.
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth
from the LO we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her
be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.
And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their
words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebek he gave also to
her brother and to her mother precious things.
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him,
and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he
said, Send me away unto my master.
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with
us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath
prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.
And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her
mouth.
And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with
this man? And she said, I will go.
And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
Abraham's servant, and his men.
And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let
thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the m and the servant took Rebekah,
and went his way.
And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide:
and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels
were coming.
And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she
lighted off the camel.
For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that
walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It
is my mast therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.
And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took
Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved h and Isaac
was comforted after his mother's death.
Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian,
and Ishbak, and Shuah.
And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were
Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and
Abidah, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had,
Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son,
while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he
lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.
And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of
Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the
Hittite, which is before Mamre;
The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there
was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God
blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom
Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abrah
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their
names, according to their generatio the firstborn of
Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by
their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to
their nations.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and
thirty and seven yea and he gave up the ghost and died; and
was gathered unto his people.
And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt,
as thou goest toward Assyr and he died in the presence of
all his brethren.
And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham
begat Isa
And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife,
the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to
Laban the Syrian.
And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was
barr and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his
wife conceived.
And the children struggled together within her; and she said,
If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the
LORD.
And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and
two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and
the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and
the elder shall serve the younger.
And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold,
there were twins in her womb.
And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment;
and they called his name Esau.
And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
Esau's heel; and his name was called Jac and Isaac was
threescore years old when she bare them.
And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but
Rebekah loved Jacob.
And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he
was fai
And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same
red pottage; for I am fai therefore was his name called
Edom.
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what
profit shall this birthright do to me?
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him:
and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his w thus Esau
despised his birthright.
And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine
that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech
king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
And the LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into
Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee 
Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless
thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these
countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto
Abraham thy father;
And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven,
and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my
commandments, my statutes, and my laws.
And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:
And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said,
She is my sist for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest,
said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah;
because she was fair to look upon.
And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and
saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.
And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she
is thy wife; and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac
said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.
And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one
of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou
shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year
an hundredfo and the LORD blessed him.
And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he
became very gre
For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and
great store of servan and the Philistines envied him.
For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in
the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped
them, and filled them with earth.
And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much
mightier than we.
And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley
of Gerar, and dwelt there.
And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had
digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines
had stopped them after the death of Abrah and he called
their names after the names by which his father had called
them.
And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a
well of springing water.
And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen,
saying, The water is ou and he called the name of the well
Esek; because they strove with him.
And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it Sitnah.
And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove n and he called the name of it Rehoboth;
and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and we
shall be fruitful in the land.
And he went up from thence to Beersheba.
And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am
the God of Abraham thy fath fear not, for I am with thee,
and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake.
And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
LORD, and pitched his tent the and there Isaac's servants
digged a well.
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his
friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me away from you?
And they said, We saw certainly that the LORD was with thee:
and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt
us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;
That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and
as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee
away in pea thou art now the blessed of the LORD.
And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to
anoth and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him
in peace.
And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came,
and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and
said unto him, We have found water.
And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is
Beersheba unto this day.
And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of
Elon the Hitti
Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes
were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest
son, and said unto him, My s and he said unto him, Behold,
here am I.
And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my
dea
Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and
thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison;
And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me,
that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.
And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau
went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.
And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard
thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat,
and bless thee before the LORD before my death.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I
command thee.
Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father,
such as he love
And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and
that he may bless thee before his death.
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother
is a hairy man, and I am a smooth m
My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him
as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a
blessing.
And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son:
only obey my voice, and go fetch me them.
And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and
his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.
And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her
younger s
And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his ne
And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had
prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said,
Here am I; who art thou, my son?
And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born; I
have done according as thou badest  arise, I pray thee, sit
and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD thy God
brought it to me.
And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him,
and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the
hands of Esau.
And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother Esau's han so he blessed him.
And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near
to him, and he did e and he brought him wine and he drank.
And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss
me, my son.
And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of
his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field which the LORD hath bless
Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness
of the earth, and plenty of corn and wi
Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord
over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to th
cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that
blesseth thee.
And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of
blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the
presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in
from his hunting.
And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat
of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said,
I am thy son, thy firstborn Esau.
And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is
he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have
eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea,
and he shall be blessed.
And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father,
Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken
away thy blessing.
And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two tim he took away my birthright;
and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said,
Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him
thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for
servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained h and
what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my
father? bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted
up his voice, and wept.
And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of
heaven from above;
And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother;
and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion,
that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.
And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed h and Esau said in his heart, The days of
mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my
brother Jacob.
And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah:
and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto
him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort
himself, purposing to kill thee.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to
Laban my brother to Haran;
And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn
away;
Until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget
that which thou hast done to h then I will send, and fetch
thee from then why should I be deprived also of you both in
one day?
And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of
the daughters of He if Jacob take a wife of the daughters
of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land,
what good shall my life do me?
And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and
said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of
Canaan.
Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of
Laban thy mother's brother.
And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;
And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy
seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou
art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto
Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah,
Jacob's and Esau's mother.
When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away
to Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he
blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take
a wife of the daughers of Canaan;
And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone
to Padanaram;
And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac
his father;
Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he
had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister
of Nebajoth, to be his wife.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of
that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that
place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and
the top of it reached to heav and behold the angels of God
ascending and descending on it.
And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isa the land
whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;
And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt
spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north,
and to the sou and in thee and in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed.
And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land;
for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the
LORD is in this place; and I knew it not.
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this
is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone
that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar,
and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of
that city was called Luz at the first.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and
will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on,
So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall
the LORD be my G
And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's
hou and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give
the tenth unto thee.
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east.
And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well
they watered the floc and a great stone was upon the well's
mouth.
And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the
stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put
the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.
And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they
said, Of Haran are we.
And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And
they said, We know him.
And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well:
and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that
the cattle should be gathered togeth water ye the sheep,
and go and feed them.
And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered
together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth;
then we water the sheep.
And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her
father's sheep; for she kept them.
And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of
Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his
mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone
from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his
mother's brother.
And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and
that he was Rebekah's s and she ran and told her father.
And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his
sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban
all these things.
And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh.
And he abode with him the space of a month.
And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother,
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what
shall thy wages be?
And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah,
and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well
favoured.
And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven
years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than
that I should give her to another m abide with me.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto
him but a few days, for the love he had to her.
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made
a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his
daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.
And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an
handmaid.
And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah:
and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did
not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou
beguiled me?
And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give
the younger before the firstborn.
Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the
service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him
Rachel his daughter to wife also.
And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to
be her maid.
And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more
than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.
And when the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb:
but Rachel was barren.
And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
Reub for she said, Surely the LORD hath looked upon my
affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the
LORD hath heard I was hated, he hath therefore given me this
son al and she called his name Simeon.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this
time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born
him three so therefore was his name called Levi.
And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now
will I praise the LO therefore she called his name Judah;
and left bearing.
And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel
envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or
else I die.
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am
I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the
womb?
And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by
her.
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went
in unto her.
And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.
And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a s therefore called she his name
Dan.
And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a
second son.
And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my
sister, and I have prevail and she called his name
Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her
maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son.
And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son.
And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me
bless and she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah.
Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's
mandrakes.
And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast
taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's
mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with
thee to night for thy son's mandrakes.
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went
out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for
surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay
with her that night.
And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob
the fifth son.
And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given
my maiden to my husba and she called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.
And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will
my husband dwell with me, because I have born him six so
and she called his name Zebulun.
And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and
opened her womb.
And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken
away my reproa
And she called his name Joseph; and said, The LORD shall add
to me another son.
And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob
said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own
place, and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee,
and let me  for thou knowest my service which I have done
thee.
And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour
in thine eyes, tar for I have learned by experience that
the LORD hath blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and
how thy cattle was with me.
For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is
now increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath blessed thee
since my comi and now when shall I provide for mine own
house also?
And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou
shalt not give me any thi if thou wilt do this thing for
me, I will again feed and keep thy flock.
I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence
all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle
among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goa
and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when
it shall come for my hire before thy fa every one that is
not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the
sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.
And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy
word.
And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted,
and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown
among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and
Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the
white appear which was in the rods.
And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in
the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to
drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth
cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.
And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the
flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock
of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put
them not unto Laban's cattle.
And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did
conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the
cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the
rods.
But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the
feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.
And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath
taken away all that was our father's; and of that which was
our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.
And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.
And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto
his flock,
And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it
is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been
with me.
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten
times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the
cattle bare speckl and if he said thus, The ringstraked
shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.
Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given
them to me.
And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived,
that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold,
the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked,
speckled, and grisled.
And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob:
And I said, Here am I.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams
which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and
grisl for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
where thou vowedst a vow unto  now arise, get thee out from
this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet
any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and
hath quite devoured also our money.
For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that
is ours, and our children now then, whatsoever God hath
said unto thee, do.
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon
camels;
And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
Padanaram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of
Canaan.
And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.
And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed
over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good
or bad.
Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in
the mou and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of
Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as
captives taken with the sword?
Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from
me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away
with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed
that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou
stolen my gods?
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid:
for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.
With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live:
before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and
take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen
them.
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and
into the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then
went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent,
but found them not.
And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that
I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon
me. And he searched but found not the images.
And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered
and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that
thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found
of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and
thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.
This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock
have I not eaten.
That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether
stolen by day, or stolen by night.
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost
by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy
catt and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now
empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my
hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.
And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these
cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mi and
what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their
children which they have born?
Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou;
and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took
stones, and made an he and they did eat there upon the
heap.
And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it
Galeed.
And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee
this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;
And Mizpah; for he said, The LORD watch between me and thee,
when we are absent one from another.
If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take
other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God
is witness betwixt me and thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and th
This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will
not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass
over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their
father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his
father Isaac.
Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bre and they did eat bread, and tarried all
night in the mount.
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons
and his daughters, and blessed th and Laban departed, and
returned unto his place.
And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim.
And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto
the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my
lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with
Laban, and stayed there until n
And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and
womenservan and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may
find grace in thy sight.
And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy
brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four
hundred men with him.
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided
the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and
the camels, into two bands;
And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then
the other company which is left shall escape.
And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy
country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with th
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all
the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with
my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two
bands.
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of Es for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me,
and the mother with the children.
And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for
multitude.
And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which
came to his hand a present for Esau his brother;
Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes,
and twenty rams,
Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten
bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.
And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every
drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over
before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and
whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?
Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a
present sent unto my lord Es and, behold, also he is behind
us.
And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that
followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak
unto Esau, when ye find him.
And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us.
For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth
before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he
will accept of me.
So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that
night in the company.
And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford
Jabbok.
And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day.
And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was
out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but
Isra for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men,
and hast prevailed.
And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name.
And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?
And he blessed him there.
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen
God face to face, and my life is preserved.
And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halted upon his thigh.
Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this d
because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew
that shrank.
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau
came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the
children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two
handmaids.
And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah
and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the
ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his
neck, and kissed h and they wept.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children
which God hath graciously given thy servant.
Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and
they bowed themselves.
And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed
themselv and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they
bowed themselves.
And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met?
And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.
And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my ha for therefore I
have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and
thou wast pleased with me.
Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee;
because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have
enough. And he urged him, and he took it.
And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I
will go before thee.
And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with  and
if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before
me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my
lord unto Seir.
And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk
that are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find
grace in the sight of my lord.
So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and
made booths for his catt therefore the name of the place is
called Succoth.
And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the
land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his
tent before the city.
And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his
tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father,
for an hundred pieces of money.
And he erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.
And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob,
went out to see the daughters of the land.
And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled
her.
And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he
loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.
And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this
damsel to wife.
And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now
his sons were with his cattle in the fie and Jacob held his
peace until they were come.
And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune
with him.
And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard
and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth,
because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's
daught which thing ought not to be done.
And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son
Shechem longeth for your daught I pray you give her him to
wife.
And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto
us, and take our daughters unto you.
And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you;
dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will
give.
Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according
as ye shall say unto  but give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their
sist
And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our
sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach
unto 
But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be,
that every male of you be circumcised;
Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take
your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will
become one people.
But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then
will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.
And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.
And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
delight in Jacob's daught and he was more honourable than
all the house of his father.
And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their
city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,
These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in
the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large
enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives,
and let us give them our daughters.
Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us,
to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as
they are circumcised.
Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they will
dwell with us.
And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that
went out of the gate of his city; and every male was
circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.
And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore,
that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's
brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city
boldly, and slew all the males.
And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the
sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister.
They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and
that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their
wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the
house.
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the
Canaanites and the Perizzit and I being few in number, they
shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and
I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an
harlot?
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell
the and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto
thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with
him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be
clean, and change your garmen
And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there
an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress,
and was with me in the way which I went.
And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in
their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears;
and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the
sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is,
Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.
And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel:
because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the
face of his brother.
But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
Bethel under an o and the name of it was called
Allonbachuth.
And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of
Padanaram, and blessed him.
And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not
be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy na and he
called his name Israel.
And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee,
and kings shall come out of thy loins;
And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will
give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.
And God went up from him in the place where he talked with
him.
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with
him, even a pillar of sto and he poured a drink offering
thereon, and he poured oil thereon.
And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with
him, Bethel.
And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to Ephra and Rachel travailed, and she had hard
labour.
And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son
also.
And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she
died) that she called his name Beno but his father called
him Benjamin.
And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which
is Bethlehem.
And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
Rachel's grave unto this day.
And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of
Edar.
And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that
Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubi and
Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twel
The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and
Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebul
The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:
And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:
And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad, and Asher: these
are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram.
And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city
of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto
his people, being old and full of da and his sons Esau and
Jacob buried him.
Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.
Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the
daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of
Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;
And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are
the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of
Canaan.
And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and
all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his
beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of
Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother
Jacob.
For their riches were more than that they might dwell
together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not
bear them because of their cattle.
Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.
And these are the generations of Esau the father of the
Edomites in mount Se
These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah
the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam,
and Kenaz.
And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to
Eliphaz Amal these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife.
And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah,
and Mizz these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.
And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah
the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife and she bare to Esau
Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the
firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke
Kenaz,
Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes
that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons
of Adah.
And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke
Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizz these are the dukes that
came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of
Bashemath Esau's wife.
And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush,
duke Jaalam, duke Kor these were the dukes that came of
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their
dukes.
These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land;
Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the
Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's
sister was Timna.
And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath,
and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah:
this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as
he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah
the daughter of Anah.
And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and
Ithran, and Cheran.
The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.
These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke
Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,
Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that
came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.
And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom,
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his
city was Dinhabah.
And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in
his stead.
And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in
his stead.
And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian
in the field of Moab, reigned in his ste and the name of
his city was Avith.
And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.
And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his
stead.
And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his
ste and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name
was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of
Mezahab.
And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau,
according to their families, after their places, by their
names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according
to their habitations in the land of their possessi he is
Esau the father of the Edomites.
And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger,
in the land of Canaan.
These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen
years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the
lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah,
his father's wiv and Joseph brought unto his father their
evil report.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he
was the son of his old a and he made him a coat of many
colours.
And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more
than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak
peaceably unto him.
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and
they hated him yet the more.
And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I
have dream
For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my
sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us?
or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him
yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.
And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren,
and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold,
the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to
me.
And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his
father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that
thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren
indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the
saying.
And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the
flock in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he
said to him, Here am I.
And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well
with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word
again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came
to Shechem.
And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in
the fie and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where
they feed their flocks.
And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them
say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren,
and found them in Dothan.
And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto
them, they conspired against him to slay him.
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.
Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into
some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured h
and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands;
and said, Let us not kill him.
And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into
this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him;
that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to
his father again.
And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren,
that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many
colours that was on him;
And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was
empty, there was no water in it.
And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes
and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from
Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh,
going to carry it down to Egypt.
And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay
our brother, and conceal his blood?
Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our
hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his
brethren were content.
Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the
Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silv and they brought
Joseph into Egypt.
And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not
in the pit; and he rent his clothes.
And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not;
and I, whither shall I go?
And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats,
and dipped the coat in the blood;
And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to
their father; and said, This have we fou know now whether
it be thy son's coat or no.
And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast
hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go
down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept
for him.
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an
officer of Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.
And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from
his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose
name was Hirah.
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose
name was Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.
And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his
name Onan.
And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his
name Shel and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.
And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was
Tamar.
And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the
LORD; and the LORD slew him.
And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and
marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to
pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled
it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his
brother.
And the thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he
slew him also.
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow
at thy father's house, till Shelah my son be gro for he
said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And
Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife
died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his
sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the
Adullamite.
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth
up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her
with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place,
which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was
grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because
she had covered her face.
And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray
thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was
his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me,
that thou mayest come in unto me?
And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she
said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?
And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy
signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine
hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she
conceived by him.
And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her,
and put on the garments of her widowhood.
And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the
Adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman's ha but
he found her not.
Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the
harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There
was no harlot in this place.
And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and
also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in
this place.
And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed:
behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.
And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told
Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the
harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And
Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law,
saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with chi and she
said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and
bracelets, and staff.
And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more
righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my
son. And he knew her again no more.
And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold,
twins were in her womb.
And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out
his ha and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a
scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold,
his brother came o and she said, How hast thou broken
forth? this breach be upon th therefore his name was called
Pharez.
And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet
thread upon his ha and his name was called Zarah.
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer
of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of
the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down
thither.
And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and
he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the
LORD made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he
made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put
into his hand.
And it came to pass from the time that he had made him
overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the LORD
blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the
blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house,
and in the field.
And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not
ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was
a goodly person, and well favoured.
And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife
cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.
But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my
master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath
committed all that he hath to my hand;
There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he
kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his
wife how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God?
And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that
he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.
And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the
house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the
house there within.
And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he
left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment
in her hand, and was fled forth,
That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto
them, saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to
mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a
loud voi
And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice
and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got
him out.
And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.
And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The
Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto
me to mock 
And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that
he left his garment with me, and fled out.
And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his
wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did
thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.
And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a
place where the king's prisoners were bou and he was there
in the prison.
But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave
him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all
the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did
there, he was the doer of it.
The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was
under his hand; because the LORD was with him, and that which
he did, the LORD made it to prosper.
And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the
king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king
of Egypt.
And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the
chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the
guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he
served th and they continued a season in ward.
And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in
one night, each man according to the interpretation of his
dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which
were bound in the prison.
And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.
And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward
of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to
day?
And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is
no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not
interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.
And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to
him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;
And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it
budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof
brought forth ripe grap
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and
pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand.
And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it:
The three branches are three da
Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and
restore thee unto thy pla and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's
cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his
butler.
But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew
kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto
Pharaoh, and bring me out of this hou
For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews:
and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into
the dungeon.
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he
said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had
three white baskets on my he
And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of
bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the
basket upon my head.
And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation
there The three baskets are three days:
Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off
thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat
thy flesh from off thee.
And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's
birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servan and he
lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker
among his servants.
And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again;
and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's ha
But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to
them.
Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.
And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh
dream and, behold, he stood by the river.
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well
favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the
river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other
kine upon the brink of the river.
And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.
And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven
ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.
And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind
sprung up after them.
And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.
And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.
And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was
troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of
Egypt, and all the wise men there and Pharaoh told them his
dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto
Pharaoh.
Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do
remember my faults this d
Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the
captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief bak
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each
man according to the interpretation of his dream.
And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to
the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted
to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did
interpret.
And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he
restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dunge and he shaved himself, and changed
his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and
there is none that can interpret  and I have heard say of
thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God
shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood
upon the bank of the riv
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine,
fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a mead
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and
very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all
the land of Egypt for badne
And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first
seven fat ki
And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that
they had eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at
the beginning. So I awoke.
And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one
stalk, full and go
And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the
east wind, sprung up after th
And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told
this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare
it to me.
And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God
hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.
The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears
are seven yea the dream is one.
And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after
them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with
the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God
is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all
the land of Egy
And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and
all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and
the famine shall consume the land;
And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of
that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.
And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is
because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly
bring it to pass.
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise,
and set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the
land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the
seven plenteous years.
And let them gather all the food of those good years that
come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them
keep food in the cities.
And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the
land perish not through the famine.
And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.
And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as
this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed
thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou a
Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall
all my people be rul only in the throne will I be greater
than thou.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all
the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and
put a gold chain about his neck;
And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had;
and they cried before him, Bow the kn and he made him ruler
over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee
shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of
Egypt.
And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave
him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On.
And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh
king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of
Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
handfuls.
And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were
in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the citi the
food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he
up in the same.
And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he left numbering; for it was without number.
And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On
bare unto him.
And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's
house.
And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.
And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of
Egypt, were ended.
And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as
Joseph had sa and the dearth was in all lands; but in all
the land of Egypt there was bread.
And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried
to Pharaoh for bre and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians,
Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph
opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and
the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said
unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt:
get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may
live, and not die.
And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his
brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.
And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came:
for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that
sold to all the people of the la and Joseph's brethren
came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to
the earth.
And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made
himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he
said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land
of Canaan to buy food.
And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and
said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land
ye are come.
And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
servants come.
We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are
no spies.
And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the
land ye are come.
And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of
one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is
this day with our father, and one is not.
And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you,
saying, Ye are spi
Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not
go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall
be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether
there be any truth in y or else by the life of Pharaoh
surely ye are spies.
And he put them all together into ward three days.
And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live;
for I fear G
If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the
house of your pris go ye, carry corn for the famine of your
hous
But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words
be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.
And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you,
saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear?
therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake
unto them by an interpreter.
And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned
to them again, and communed with them, and took from them
Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to
restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them
provision for the w and thus did he unto them.
And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.
And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender
in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his
sack's mouth.
And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo,
it is even in my sa and their heart failed them, and they
were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath
done unto us?
And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan,
and told him all that befell unto them; saying,
The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and
took us for spies of the country.
And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:
We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the
youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby
shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren
here with me, and take food for the famine of your households,
and be go
And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know
that ye are no spies, but that ye are true m so will I
deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.
And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold,
every man's bundle of money was in his sa and when both
they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were
afraid.
And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of
my childr Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will
take Benjamin aw all these things are against me.
And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if
I bring him not to th deliver him into my hand, and I will
bring him to thee again.
And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his
brother is dead, and he is left alo if mischief befall him
by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
And the famine was sore in the land.
And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which
they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go
again, buy us a little food.
And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest
unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother
be with you.
If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy
thee fo
But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the
man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your
brother be with you.
And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother?
And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of
our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another
brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these
wor could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your
brother down?
And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me,
and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both
we, and thou, and also our little ones.
I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him:
if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then
let me bear the blame for ev
For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this
second time.
And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now,
do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels,
and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little
honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almon
And take double money in your hand; and the money that was
brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in
your hand; peradventure it was an oversig
Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:
And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may
send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved
of my children, I am bereaved.
And the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt,
and stood before Joseph.
And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler
of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready;
for these men shall dine with me at noon.
And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men
into Joseph's house.
And the men were afraid, because they were brought into
Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was
returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in;
that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and
take us for bondmen, and our asses.
And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they
communed with him at the door of the house,
And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy
fo
And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened
our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of
his sack, our money in full weig and we have brought it
again in our hand.
And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food:
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.
And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God
of your father, hath given you treasure in your sac I had
your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.
And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them
water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses
provender.
And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon:
for they heard that they should eat bread there.
And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him
to the earth.
And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?
And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health,
he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made
obeisance.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom
ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my
son.
And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his
broth and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his
chamber, and wept there.
And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself,
and said, Set on bread.
And they set on for him by himself, and for them by
themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by
themselv because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the
Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his
birthright, and the youngest according to his you and the
men marvelled one at another.
And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but
Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. And
they drank, and were merry with him.
And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the
men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put
every man's money in his sack's mouth.
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the
youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word
that Joseph had spoken.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they
and their asses.
And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and
when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye
rewarded evil for good?
Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed
he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.
And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words?
God forbid that thy servants should do according to this
thi
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we
brought again unto thee out of the land of Cana how then
should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die,
and we also will be my lord's bondmen.
And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be
blameless.
Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground,
and opened every man his sack.
And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the
younge and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
returned to the city.
And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was
yet the and they fell before him on the ground.
And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have
done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?
And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we
speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the
iniquity of thy servan behold, we are my lord's servants,
both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.
And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in
whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as
for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy
servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let
not thine anger burn against thy serva for thou art even as
Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a
brother?
And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a
child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead,
and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me,
that I may set mine eyes upon him.
And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for
if he should leave his father, his father would die.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest
brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my
father, we told him the words of my lord.
And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be
with us, then will we go do for we may not see the man's
face, except our youngest brother be with us.
And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife
bare me two so
And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in
pieces; and I saw him not sin
And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye
shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the
lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the
lad's life;
It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with
us, that he will d and thy servants shall bring down the
gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father,
saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the
blame to my father for ever.
Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of
the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his
brethren.
For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with
me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my
father.
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that
stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me.
And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself
known unto his brethren.
And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh
heard.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father
yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubled at his presence.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray
you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your
brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that
ye sold me hith for God did send me before you to preserve
life.
For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet
there are five years, in the which there shall neither be
earing nor harvest.
And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he
hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house,
and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith
thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egy come down
unto me, tarry n
And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be
near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou
ha
And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of
famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast,
come to poverty.
And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother
Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.
And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of
all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my
father hither.
And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and
Benjamin wept upon his neck.
Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and
after that his brethren talked with him.
And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
Joseph's brethren are co and it pleased Pharaoh well, and
his servants.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do
ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;
And take your father and your households, and come unto me:
and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye
shall eat the fat of the land.
Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the
land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and
bring your father, and come.
Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of
Egypt is your's.
And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them
wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them
provision for the way.
To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to
Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five
changes of raiment.
And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden
with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with
corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said
unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.
And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of
Canaan unto Jacob their father,
And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor
over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he
believed them not.
And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said
unto th and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to
carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father reviv
And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I
will go and see him before I die.
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
Beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father
Isaac.
And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and
said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go
down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nati
I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely
bring thee up aga and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine
eyes.
And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel
carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their
wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and
all his seed with h
His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his
sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into
Egypt.
And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came
into Egypt, Jacob and his so Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and
Carmi.
And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and
Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.
And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez,
and Zar but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the
sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and
Shimron.
And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in
Padanaram, with his daughter Din all the souls of his sons
and his daughters were thirty and three.
And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon,
Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and
Beriah, and Serah their sist and the sons of Beriah; Heber,
and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.
The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.
And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and
Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On
bare unto him.
And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel,
Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all
the souls were fourteen.
And the sons of Dan; Hushim.
And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto Jac all the souls were
seven.
All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out
of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were
threescore and six;
And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two
sou all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into
Egypt, were threescore and ten.
And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face
unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.
And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel
his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he
fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen
thy face, because thou art yet alive.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's
house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My
brethren, and my father's house, which were in the land of
Canaan, are come unto me;
And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds,
and all that they have.
And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and
shall say, What is your occupation?
That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle
from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathe
that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is
an abomination unto the Egyptians.
Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they
have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they
are in the land of Goshen.
And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation?
And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both
we, and also our fathers.
They said morever unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are
we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks;
for the famine is sore in the land of Cana now therefore,
we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy
brethren are come unto th
The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make
thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let
them dwe and if thou knowest any men of activity among
them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before
Phara and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my
pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty yea few and evil have
the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the
days of their pilgrimage.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a
possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in
the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his
father's household, with bread, according to their families.
And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was
very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of
Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the
land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which
they boug and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's
house.
And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of
Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us
bre for why should we die in thy presence? for the money
faileth.
And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for
your cattle, if money fail.
And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave
them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for
the cattle of the herds, and for the ass and he fed them
with bread for all their cattle for that year.
When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that
our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle;
there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our
bodies, and our lan
Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our
land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will
be servants unto Phara and give us seed, that we may live,
and not die, that the land be not desolate.
And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the
Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine
prevailed over th so the land became Pharaoh's.
And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end
of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.
Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests
had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave th wherefore they sold not their
lands.
Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you
this day and your land for Phara lo, here is seed for you,
and ye shall sow the land.
And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give
the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own,
for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your
households, and for food for your little ones.
And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in
the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.
And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day,
that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of
the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.
And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of
Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and
multiplied exceedingly.
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the
whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.
And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his
son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in
thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal
kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egy
But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of
Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will
do as thou hast said.
And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.
And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph,
Behold, thy father is si and he took with him his two sons,
Manasseh and Ephraim.
And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh
unto th and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the
bed.
And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at
Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people;
and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an
everlasting possession.
And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born
unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into
Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.
And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be
thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in
their inheritance.
And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in
the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little
way to come unto Ephra and I buried her there in the way of
Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.
And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?
And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God
hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray
thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them,
and embraced them.
And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy
fa and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.
And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he
bowed himself with his face to the earth.
And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward
Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward
Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon
Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was
the firstborn.
And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life
long unto this day,
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and
let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the
midst of the earth.
And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon
the head of Ephraim, it displeased h and he held up his
father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto
Manasseh's head.
And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this
is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.
And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great:
but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and
his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel
bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manass and
he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and
with my bow.
And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in
the last days.
Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and
hearken unto Israel your father.
Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of
my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of
pow
Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest
up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou  he went up to
my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in
their habitations.
O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their
assembly, mine honour, be not thou unit for in their anger
they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a
wall.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for
it was cru I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel.
Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand
shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children
shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone
he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion;
who shall rouse him up?
The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be.
Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the
choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes
in the blood of grap
His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with
milk.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be
for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.
Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was
pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant
unto tribute.
Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.
I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD.
Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.
Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.
Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wa
The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and
hated h
But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were
made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from
thence is the shepherd, the stone of Isra)
Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the
Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the
breasts, and of the wo
The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings
of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting
hil they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown
of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour
the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that
their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one
according to his blessing he blessed them.
And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered
unto my peop bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in
the field of Ephron the Hittite,
In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before
Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the
field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they
buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.
The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of Heth.
And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost,
and was gathered unto his people.
And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.
And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
fath and the physicians embalmed Israel.
And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled
the days of those which are embalm and the Egyptians
mourned for him threescore and ten days.
And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto
the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in
your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which
I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou
bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my
father, and I will come again.
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he
made thee swear.
And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up
all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all
the elders of the land of Egypt,
And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his
father's hou only their little ones, and their flocks, and
their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it
was a very great company.
And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond
Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore
lamentati and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous
mourning to the Egyptia wherefore the name of it was called
Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan.
And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:
For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried
him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham
bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of
Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried
his father.
And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead,
they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will
certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did
command before he died, saying,
So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the
trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto
thee ev and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the
servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they
spake unto him.
And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, Behold, we be thy servants.
And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of
God?
But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it
unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much
people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little
ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.
And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and
Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.
And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up
upon Joseph's knees.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which
he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from
hence.
So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Now the earth was formless and empty.  Darkness was on the surface
of the deep.  God's Spirit was hovering over the surface
of the waters.
God said, "Let there be light," and there was light.
God saw the light, and saw that it was good.  God divided
the light from the darkness.
God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.
There was evening and there was morning, one day.
God said, "Let there be an expanse in the middle of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters."
God made the expanse, and divided the waters which were under
the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse;
and it was so.
God called the expanse sky.  There was evening and there
was morning, a second day.
God said, "Let the waters under the sky be gathered together
to one place, and let the dry land appear;" and it was so.
God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together
of the waters he called Seas.  God saw that it was good.
God said, "Let the earth put forth grass, herbs yielding seed,
and fruit trees bearing fruit after their kind, with its seed
in it, on the earth;" and it was so.
The earth brought forth grass, herbs yielding seed after their kind,
and trees bearing fruit, with its seed in it, after their kind;
and God saw that it was good.
There was evening and there was morning, a third day.
God said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of sky to
divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs,
and for seasons, and for days and years;
and let them be for lights in the expanse of sky to give light
on the earth;" and it was so.
God made the two great lights:  the greater light to rule
the day, and the lesser light to rule the night.
He also made the stars.
God set them in the expanse of sky to give light to the earth,
and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide
the light from the darkness.  God saw that it was good.
There was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
God said, "Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures,
and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of sky."
God created the large sea creatures, and every living
creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed,
after their kind, and every winged bird after its kind.
God saw that it was good.
God blessed them, saying, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth."
There was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures after
their kind, livestock, creeping things, and animals of the earth
after their kind;" and it was so.
God made the animals of the earth after their kind,
and the livestock after their kind, and everything that creeps
on the ground after its kind.  God saw that it was good.
God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the birds of the sky, and over the livestock,
and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps on the earth."
God created man in his own image.  In God's image he created him;
male and female he created them.
God blessed them.  God said to them, "Be fruitful, multiply,
fill the earth, and subdue it.  Have dominion over the fish
of the sea, over the birds of the sky, and over every living
thing that moves on the earth."
God said, "Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed,
which is on the surface of all the earth, and every tree,
which bears fruit yielding seed.  It will be your food.
To every animal of the earth, and to every bird of the sky,
and to everything that creeps on the earth, in which there is life,
I have given every green herb for food;" and it was so.
God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good.
There was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
The heavens and the earth were finished, and all their vast array.
On the seventh day God finished his work which he had made;
and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which
he had made.
God blessed the seventh day, and made it holy, because he rested
in it from all his work which he had created and made.
This is the history of the generations of the heavens and of
the earth when they were created, in the day that Yahweh God
made the earth and the heavens.
No plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of
the field had yet sprung up; for Yahweh God had not caused it
to rain on the earth.  There was not a man to till the ground,
but a mist went up from the earth, and watered the whole
surface of the ground.
Yahweh God formed man from the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man
became a living soul.
Yahweh God planted a garden eastward, in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed.
Out of the ground Yahweh God made every tree to grow that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life
also in the middle of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil.
A river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from there
it was parted, and became four heads.
The name of the first is Pishon:  this is the one which flows
through the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
and the gold of that land is good.  There is aromatic resin
and the onyx stone.
The name of the second river is Gihon:  the same river that flows
through the whole land of Cush.
The name of the third river is Hiddekel:  this is the one which
flows in front of Assyria.  The fourth river is the Euphrates.
Yahweh God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden
to dress it and to keep it.
Yahweh God commanded the man, saying, "Of every tree of the garden
you may freely eat;
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall
not eat of it; for in the day that you eat of it you
will surely die."
Yahweh God said, "It is not good that the man should be alone;
I will make him a helper suitable for him."
Out of the ground Yahweh God formed every animal of the field,
and every bird of the sky, and brought them to the man to see
what he would call them.  Whatever the man called every
living creature, that was its name.
The man gave names to all livestock, and to the birds of the sky,
and to every animal of the field; but for man there was not
found a helper suitable for him.
Yahweh God caused a deep sleep to fall on the man, and he slept;
and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh
in its place.
He made the rib, which Yahweh God had taken from the man,
into a woman, and brought her to the man.
The man said, "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.
She will be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man."
Therefore a man will leave his father and his mother,
and will join with his wife, and they will be one flesh.
They were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
Now the serpent was more subtle than any animal of the field
which Yahweh God had made.  He said to the woman, "Has God
really said, 'You shall not eat of any tree of the garden?'"
The woman said to the serpent, "Of the fruit of the trees
of the garden we may eat,
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden,
God has said, 'You shall not eat of it, neither shall you
touch it, lest you die.'"
The serpent said to the woman, "You won't surely die,
for God knows that in the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened,
and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."
When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it
was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired
to make one wise, she took of the fruit of it, and ate;
and she gave some to her husband with her, and he ate.
The eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew
that they were naked.  They sewed fig leaves together,
and made themselves aprons.
They heard the voice of Yahweh God walking in the garden in
the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of Yahweh God among the trees of the garden.
Yahweh God called to the man, and said to him, "Where are you?"
The man said, "I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I was naked; and I hid myself."
God said, "Who told you that you were naked?  Have you eaten
from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?"
The man said, "The woman whom you gave to be with me,
she gave me of the tree, and I ate."
Yahweh God said to the woman, "What is this you have done?"
The woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
Yahweh God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this,
cursed are you above all livestock, and above every animal
of the field.  On your belly shall you go, and you shall eat
dust all the days of your life.
I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your
offspring and her offspring.  He will bruise your head,
and you will bruise his heel."
To the woman he said, "I will greatly multiply your pain
in childbirth.  In pain you will bring forth children.
Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you."
To Adam he said, "Because you have listened to your wife's voice,
and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded you, saying,
'You shall not eat of it,' cursed is the ground for your sake.
In toil you will eat of it all the days of your life.
Thorns also and thistles will it bring forth to you;
and you will eat the herb of the field.
By the sweat of your face will you eat bread until you
return to the ground, for out of it you were taken.
For you are dust, and to dust you shall return."
The man called his wife Eve, because she was the mother
of all living.
Yahweh God made coats of skins for Adam and for his wife,
and clothed them.
Yahweh God said, "Behold, the man has become like one of us,
knowing good and evil.  Now, lest he put forth his hand,
and also take of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever..."
Therefore Yahweh God sent him forth from the garden of Eden,
to till the ground from which he was taken.
So he drove out the man; and he placed Cherubs at the east
of the garden of Eden, and the flame of a sword which turned
every way, to guard the way to the tree of life.
The man knew Eve his wife.  She conceived, and gave birth to Cain,
and said, "I have gotten a man with Yahweh's help."
Again she gave birth, to Cain's brother Abel.  Abel was a keeper
of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
As time passed, it happened that Cain brought an offering
to Yahweh from the fruit of the ground.
Abel also brought some of the firstborn of his flock and of
the fat of it.  Yahweh respected Abel and his offering,
but he didn't respect Cain and his offering.  Cain was very angry,
and the expression on his face fell.
Yahweh said to Cain, "Why are you angry?  Why has the expression
of your face fallen?
If you do well, will it not be lifted up?  If you don't do well,
sin crouches at the door.  Its desire is for you, but you
are to rule over it."
Cain said to Abel, his brother, "Let's go into the field."
It happened when they were in the field, that Cain rose up
against Abel, his brother, and killed him.
Yahweh said to Cain, "Where is Abel, your brother?"
He said, "I don't know.  Am I my brother's keeper?"
Yahweh said, "What have you done?  The voice of your brother's
blood cries to me from the ground.
Now you are cursed because of the ground, which has opened
its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.
From now on, when you till the ground, it won't yield its
strength to you.  You shall be a fugitive and a wanderer
in the earth."
Cain said to Yahweh, "My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, you have driven me out this day from the surface
of the ground.  I will be hidden from your face,
and I will be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth.
It will happen that whoever finds me will kill me."
Yahweh said to him, "Therefore whoever slays Cain, vengeance will
be taken on him sevenfold."  Yahweh appointed a sign for Cain,
lest any finding him should strike him.
Cain went out from Yahweh's presence, and lived in the land
of Nod, east of Eden.
Cain knew his wife.  She conceived, and gave birth to Enoch.
He built a city, and called the name of the city, after the name
of his son, Enoch.
To Enoch was born Irad.  Irad became the father of Mehujael.
Mehujael became the father of Methushael.  Methushael became
the father of Lamech.
Lamech took two wives:  the name of the one was Adah,
and the name of the other Zillah.
Adah gave birth to Jabal, who was the father of those who dwell
in tents and have livestock.
His brother's name was Jubal, who was the father of all who
handle the harp and pipe.
Zillah also gave birth to Tubal Cain, the forger of every cutting
instrument of brass and iron.  Tubal Cain's sister was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives, "Adah and Zillah, hear my voice.
You wives of Lamech, listen to my speech, for I have slain
a man for wounding me, a young man for bruising me.
If Cain will be avenged seven times, truly Lamech
seventy-seven times."
Adam knew his wife again.  She gave birth to a son, and named
him Seth, "for God has appointed me another child instead
of Abel, for Cain killed him."
There was also born a son to Seth, and he named him Enosh.
Then men began to call on Yahweh's name.
This is the book of the generations of Adam.  In the day
that God created man, he made him in God's likeness.
He created them male and female, and blessed them, and called
their name Adam, in the day when they were created.
Adam lived one hundred thirty years, and became the father of a
son in his own likeness, after his image, and named him Seth.
The days of Adam after he became the father of Seth were eight
hundred years, and he became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days that Adam lived were nine hundred thirty years,
then he died.
Seth lived one hundred five years, and became the father of Enosh.
Seth lived after he became the father of Enosh eight hundred
seven years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Seth were nine hundred twelve years,
then he died.
Enosh lived ninety years, and became the father of Kenan.
Enosh lived after he became the father of Kenan, eight hundred
fifteen years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Enosh were nine hundred five years, then he died.
Kenan lived seventy years, and became the father of Mahalalel.
Kenan lived after he became the father of Mahalalel eight hundred
forty years, and became the father of sons and daughters
and all the days of Kenan were nine hundred ten years,
then he died.
Mahalalel lived sixty-five years, and became the father of Jared.
Mahalalel lived after he became the father of Jared eight hundred
thirty years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred ninety-five years,
then he died.
Jared lived one hundred sixty-two years, and became
the father of Enoch.
Jared lived after he became the father of Enoch eight hundred years,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty-two years,
then he died.
Enoch lived sixty-five years, and became the father of Methuselah.
Enoch walked with God after he became the father of Methuselah
three hundred years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years.
Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
Methuselah lived one hundred eighty-seven years, and became
the father of Lamech.
Methuselah lived after he became the father of Lamech seven hundred
eighty-two years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty-nine years,
then he died.
Lamech lived one hundred eighty-two years, and became the father
of a son,
and he named him Noah, saying, "This same will comfort us
in our work and in the toil of our hands, because of the ground
which Yahweh has cursed."
Lamech lived after he became the father of Noah five hundred
ninety-five years, and became the father of sons and daughters.
All the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy-seven years,
then he died.
Noah was five hundred years old, and Noah became the father
of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
It happened, when men began to multiply on the surface
of the ground, and daughters were born to them,
that God's sons saw that men's daughters were beautiful,
and they took for themselves wives of all that they chose.
Yahweh said, "My Spirit will not strive with man forever,
because he also is flesh; yet will his days be one
hundred twenty years."
The Nephilim were in the earth in those days, and also
after that, when God's sons came in to men's daughters.
They bore children to them.  Those were the mighty men
who were of old, men of renown.
Yahweh saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually.
Yahweh was sorry that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him in his heart.
Yahweh said, "I will destroy man whom I have created
from the surface of the ground; man, along with animals,
creeping things, and birds of the sky; for I am sorry that I
have made them."
But Noah found favor in Yahweh's eyes.
This is the history of the generations of Noah.  Noah was
a righteous man, blameless among the people of his time.
Noah walked with God.
Noah became the father of three sons:  Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
The earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was
filled with violence.
God saw the earth, and saw that it was corrupt, for all flesh
had corrupted their way on the earth.
God said to Noah, "The end of all flesh has come before me,
for the earth is filled with violence through them.
Behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make a ship of gopher wood.  You shall make rooms in the ship,
and shall seal it inside and outside with pitch.
This is how you shall make it.  The length of the ship will
be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,
and the height of it thirty cubits.
You shall make a roof in the ship, and to a cubit shall you finish
it upward.  You shall set the door of the ship in its side.
You shall make it with lower, second, and third levels.
I, even I, do bring the flood of waters on this earth, to destroy
all flesh having the breath of life from under the sky.
Everything that is in the earth will die.
But I will establish my covenant with you.  You shall come
into the ship, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons'
wives with you.
Of every living thing of all flesh, you shall bring two
of every sort into the ship, to keep them alive with you.
They shall be male and female.
Of the birds after their kind, of the livestock after their kind,
of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind,
two of every sort shall come to you, to keep them alive.
Take with you of all food that is eaten, and gather it to you;
and it will be for food for you, and for them."
Thus Noah did.  According to all that God commanded him,
so he did.
Yahweh said to Noah, "Come with all of your household into
the ship, for I have seen your righteousness before me
in this generation.
You shall take seven pairs of every clean animal with you,
the male and his female.  Of the animals that are not clean,
take two, the male and his female.
Also of the birds of the sky, seven and seven, male and female,
to keep seed alive on the surface of all the earth.
In seven days, I will cause it to rain on the earth for forty
days and forty nights.  Every living thing that I have made,
I will destroy from the surface of the ground."
Noah did everything that Yahweh commanded him.
Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters came
on the earth.
Noah went into the ship with his sons, his wife, and his sons'
wives, because of the waters of the flood.
Clean animals, animals that are not clean, birds, and everything
that creeps on the ground
went by pairs to Noah into the ship, male and female,
as God commanded Noah.
It happened after the seven days, that the waters of the flood
came on the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month,
on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all
the fountains of the great deep were burst open, and the sky's
windows were opened.
The rain was on the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the same day Noah, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah,
and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them,
entered into the ship;
they, and every animal after its kind, all the livestock after
their kind, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth
after its kind, and every bird after its kind, every bird
of every sort.
They went to Noah into the ship, by pairs of all flesh with
the breath of life in them.
Those who went in, went in male and female of all flesh,
as God commanded him; and Yahweh shut him in.
The flood was forty days on the earth.  The waters increased,
and lifted up the ship, and it was lifted up above the earth.
The waters prevailed, and increased greatly on the earth;
and the ship floated on the surface of the waters.
The waters prevailed exceedingly on the earth.  All the high
mountains that were under the whole sky were covered.
The waters prevailed fifteen cubits upward, and the
mountains were covered.
All flesh died that moved on the earth, including birds,
livestock, animals, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth,
and every man.
All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life,
of all that was on the dry land, died.
Every living thing was destroyed that was on the surface
of the ground, including man, livestock, creeping things,
and birds of the sky.  They were destroyed from the earth.
Only Noah was left, and those who were with him in the ship.
The waters prevailed on the earth one hundred fifty days.
God remembered Noah, all the animals, and all the livestock that were
with him in the ship; and God made a wind to pass over the earth.
The waters subsided.
The deep's fountains and the sky's windows were also stopped,
and the rain from the sky was restrained.
The waters receded from the earth continually.  After the end
of one hundred fifty days the waters decreased.
The ship rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day
of the month, on Ararat's mountains.
The waters receded continually until the tenth month.
In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tops
of the mountains were seen.
It happened at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window
of the ship which he had made,
and he sent forth a raven.  It went back and forth,
until the waters were dried up from the earth.
He sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated
from the surface of the ground,
but the dove found no place to rest her foot, and she returned
to him into the ship; for the waters were on the surface
of the whole earth.  He put forth his hand, and took her,
and brought her to him into the ship.
He stayed yet another seven days; and again he sent forth
the dove out of the ship.
The dove came back to him at evening, and, behold, in her mouth
was an olive leaf plucked off.  So Noah knew that the waters
were abated from the earth.
He stayed yet another seven days, and sent forth the dove;
and she didn't return to him any more.
It happened in the six hundred first year, in the first month,
the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from the earth.
Noah removed the covering of the ship, and looked.
He saw that the surface of the ground was dried.
In the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month,
the earth was dry.
God spoke to Noah, saying,
"Go out of the ship, you, and your wife, and your sons,
and your sons' wives with you.
Bring forth with you every living thing that is with you
of all flesh, including birds, livestock, and every creeping
thing that creeps on the earth, that they may breed abundantly
in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply on the earth."
Noah went forth, with his sons, his wife, and his sons'
wives with him.
Every animal, every creeping thing, and every bird, whatever moves
on the earth, after their families, went out of the ship.
Noah built an altar to Yahweh, and took of every clean animal,
and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings
on the altar.
Yahweh smelled the sweet savor.  Yahweh said in his heart,
"I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake,
because the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth;
neither will I ever again strike everything living,
as I have done.
While the earth remains, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat,
and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease."
God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, "Be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth.
The fear of you and the dread of you will be on every
animal of the earth, and on every bird of the sky.
Everything that the ground teems with, and all the fish
of the sea are delivered into your hand.
Every moving thing that lives will be food for you.
As the green herb, I have given everything to you.
But flesh with the life of it, the blood of it, you shall not eat.
I will surely require your blood of your lives.
At the hand of every animal I will require it.
At the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother,
I will require the life of man.
Whoever sheds man's blood, his blood will be shed by man,
for God made man in his own image.
Be fruitful and multiply.  Bring forth abundantly in the earth,
and multiply in it."
God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
"As for me, behold, I establish my covenant with you,
and with your offspring after you,
and with every living creature that is with you:  the birds,
the livestock, and every animal of the earth with you,
of all that go out of the ship, even every animal of the earth.
I will establish my covenant with you:  all flesh will not be cut
off any more by the waters of the flood, neither will there
ever again be a flood to destroy the earth."
God said, "This is the token of the covenant which I make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you,
for perpetual generations:
I set my rainbow in the cloud, and it will be for a sign
of a covenant between me and the earth.
It will happen, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the rainbow will be seen in the cloud,
and I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you
and every living creature of all flesh, and the waters will
no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
The rainbow will be in the cloud.  I will look at it, that I
may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every
living creature of all flesh that is on the earth."
God said to Noah, "This is the token of the covenant which I
have established between me and all flesh that is on the earth."
The sons of Noah who went forth from the ship were Shem, Ham,
and Japheth.  Ham is the father of Canaan.
These three were the sons of Noah, and from these, the whole
earth was populated.
Noah began to be a farmer, and planted a vineyard.
He drank of the wine and got drunk.  He was uncovered
within his tent.
Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
and told his two brothers outside.
Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it on both their shoulders,
went in backwards, and covered the nakedness of their father.
Their faces were backwards, and they didn't see
their father's nakedness.
Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest son had
done to him.
He said, "Canaan is cursed.  He will be servant of servants
to his brothers."
He said, "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Shem.  Let Canaan
be his servant.
May God enlarge Japheth.  Let him dwell in the tents of Shem.
Let Canaan be his servant."
Noah lived three hundred fifty years after the flood.
All the days of Noah were nine hundred fifty years, then he died.
Now this is the history of the generations of the sons of Noah
and of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.  Sons were born to them
after the flood.
The sons of Japheth:  Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech,
and Tiras.
The sons of Gomer:  Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
The sons of Javan:  Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
Of these were the islands of the nations divided in their lands,
everyone after his language, after their families,
in their nations.
The sons of Ham:  Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
The sons of Cush:  Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca.
The sons of Raamah:  Sheba and Dedan.
Cush became the father of Nimrod.  He began to be a mighty
one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before Yahweh.  Therefore it is said,
"Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before Yahweh."
The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh,
in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land he went forth into Assyria, and built
Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah,
and Resen between Nineveh and Calah (the same is the great city).
Mizraim became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim,
Pathrusim, Casluhim (which the Philistines descended from),
and Caphtorim.
Canaan became the father of Sidon (his firstborn), Heth,
the Jebusite, the Amorite, the Girgashite,
the Hivite, the Arkite, the Sinite,
the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.
Afterward the families of the Canaanites were spread abroad.
The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as you go
toward Gerar, to Gaza; as you go toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
and Zeboiim, to Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, after their families,
after their languages, in their lands, in their nations.
To Shem, the father of all the children of Eber, the elder
brother of Japheth, to him also were children born.
The sons of Shem:  Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram.
The sons of Aram:  Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.
Arpachshad became the father of Shelah.  Shelah became
the father of Eber.
To Eber were born two sons.  The name of the one was Peleg,
for in his days the earth was divided.  His brother's
name was Joktan.
Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab.  All these were the sons of Joktan.
Their dwelling was from Mesha, as you go toward Sephar,
the mountain of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, after their families,
after their languages, in their lands, after their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations,
in their nations.  Of these were the nations divided in the earth
after the flood.
The whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
It happened, as they traveled east, that they found a plain
in the land of Shinar, and they lived there.
They said one to another, "Come, let's make bricks, and burn
them thoroughly."  They had brick for stone, and they used
tar for mortar.
They said, "Come, let's build ourselves a city, and a tower
whose top reaches to the sky, and let's make ourselves a name,
lest we be scattered abroad on the surface of the whole earth."
Yahweh came down to see the city and the tower, which the children
of men built.
Yahweh said, "Behold, they are one people, and they have
all one language, and this is what they begin to do.
Now nothing will be withheld from them, which they intend to do.
Come, let's go down, and there confuse their language,
that they may not understand one another's speech."
So Yahweh scattered them abroad from there on the surface
of all the earth.  They stopped building the city.
Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because there
Yahweh confused the language of all the earth.  From there,
Yahweh scattered them abroad on the surface of all the earth.
This is the history of the generations of Shem.  Shem was
one hundred years old and became the father of Arpachshad
two years after the flood.
Shem lived five hundred years after he became the father
of Arpachshad, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Arpachshad lived thirty-five years and became the father of Shelah.
Arpachshad lived four hundred three years after he became the father
of Shelah, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Shelah lived thirty years, and became the father of Eber:
and Shelah lived four hundred three years after he became
the father of Eber, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Eber lived thirty-four years, and became the father of Peleg.
Eber lived four hundred thirty years after he became the father
of Peleg, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Peleg lived thirty years, and became the father of Reu.
Peleg lived two hundred nine years after he became the father
of Reu, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Reu lived thirty-two years, and became the father of Serug.
Reu lived two hundred seven years after he became the father
of Serug, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Serug lived thirty years, and became the father of Nahor.
Serug lived two hundred years after he became the father of Nahor,
and became the father of sons and daughters.
Nahor lived twenty-nine years, and became the father of Terah.
Nahor lived one hundred nineteen years after he became the father
of Terah, and became the father of sons and daughters.
Terah lived seventy years, and became the father
of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Now this is the history of the generations of Terah.
Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Haran became the father of Lot.
Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his birth,
in Ur of the Chaldees.
Abram and Nahor took wives.  The name of Abram's wife was Sarai,
and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran
who was also the father of Iscah.
Sarai was barren.  She had no child.
Terah took Abram his son, Lot the son of Haran, his son's son,
and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife.  They went
forth from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan.
They came to Haran and lived there.
The days of Terah were two hundred five years.
Terah died in Haran.
Now Yahweh said to Abram, "Get out of your country,
and from your relatives, and from your father's house,
to the land that I will show you.
I will make of you a great nation.  I will bless you and make
your name great.  You will be a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him
who curses you.  In you will all of the families of the
earth be blessed."
So Abram went, as Yahweh had spoken to him.  Lot went with him.
Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran.
Abram took Sarai his wife, Lot his brother's son, all their substance
that they had gathered, and the souls whom they had gotten
in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan.
Into the land of Canaan they came.
Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem,
to the oak of Moreh.  The Canaanite was then in the land.
Yahweh appeared to Abram and said, "I will give this land to
your seed." He built an altar there to Yahweh,
who appeared to him.
He left from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel,
and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Ai
on the east.  There he built an altar to Yahweh and called
on the name of Yahweh.
Abram traveled, going on still toward the South.
There was a famine in the land.  Abram went down into Egypt
to live as a foreigner there, for the famine was severe
in the land.
It happened, when he had come near to enter Egypt, that he said
to Sarai his wife, "See now, I know that you are a beautiful
woman to look at.
It will happen, when the Egyptians will see you, that they
will say, 'This is his wife.'  They will kill me, but they
will save you alive.
Please say that you are my sister, that it may be well with me
for your sake, and that my soul may live because of you."
It happened that when Abram had come into Egypt, the Egyptians
saw that the woman was very beautiful.
The princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to Pharaoh;
and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
He dealt well with Abram for her sake.  He had sheep,
oxen, male donkeys, male servants, female servants,
female donkeys, and camels.
Yahweh plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
Pharaoh called Abram and said, "What is this that you have done
to me?  Why didn't you tell me that she was your wife?
Why did you say, 'She is my sister,' so that I took her
to be my wife?  Now therefore, see your wife, take her,
and go your way."
Pharaoh gave men charge concerning him, and they brought him
on the way with his wife and all that he had.
Abram went up out of Egypt:  he, his wife, all that he had,
and Lot with him, into the South.
Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold.
He went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel,
to the place where his tent had been at the beginning,
between Bethel and Ai,
to the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first.
There Abram called on the name of Yahweh.
Lot also, who went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
The land was not able to bear them, that they might live together:
for their substance was great, so that they could not live together.
There was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's livestock
and the herdsmen of Lot's livestock:  and the Canaanite
and the Perizzite lived in the land at that time.
Abram said to Lot, "Please, let there be no strife between
me and you, and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen;
for we are relatives.
Isn't the whole land before you?  Please separate yourself from me.
If you go to the left hand, then I will go to the right.
Or if you go to the right hand, then I will go to the left."
Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of the Jordan,
that it was well-watered everywhere, before Yahweh destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of Yahweh, like the land
of Egypt, as you go to Zoar.
So Lot chose the Plain of the Jordan for himself.
Lot traveled east, and they separated themselves the one
from the other.
Abram lived in the land of Canaan, and Lot lived in the cities
of the plain, and moved his tent as far as Sodom.
Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinners
against Yahweh.
Yahweh said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him, "Now,
lift up your eyes, and look from the place where you are,
northward and southward and eastward and westward,
for all the land which you see, I will give to you, and to
your offspring forever.
I will make your offspring as the dust of the earth, so that
if a man can number the dust of the earth, then your seed
may also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth
of it; for I will give it to you."
Abram moved his tent, and came and lived by the oaks of Mamre,
which are in Hebron, and built an altar there to Yahweh.
It happened in the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar, Arioch,
king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal,
king of Goiim,
that they made war with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha,
king of Gomorrah, Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber,
king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar).
All these joined together in the valley of Siddim (the same
is the Salt Sea).
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth
year, they rebelled.
In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer came, and the kings who
were with him, and struck the Rephaim in Ashteroth Karnaim,
and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
and the Horites in their Mount Seir, to Elparan, which is
by the wilderness.
They returned, and came to En Mishpat (the same is Kadesh),
and struck all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites,
that lived in Hazazon Tamar.
The king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king
of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela
(the same is Zoar) went out; and they set the battle in array
against them in the valley of Siddim;
against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim,
and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar;
four kings against the five.
Now the valley of Siddim was full of tar pits; and the kings
of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell there, and those
who remained fled to the hills.
They took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food,
and went their way.
They took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who lived in Sodom,
and his goods, and departed.
One who had escaped came and told Abram, the Hebrew.
Now he lived by the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol,
and brother of Aner; and these were allies of Abram.
When Abram heard that his relative was taken captive, he led forth
his trained men, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen,
and pursued as far as Dan.
He divided himself against them by night, he and his servants,
and struck them, and pursued them to Hobah, which is on the left
hand of Damascus.
He brought back all the goods, and also brought back
his relative, Lot, and his goods, and the women also,
and the people.
The king of Sodom went out to meet him, after his return from
the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him,
at the valley of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley).
Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine:
and he was priest of God Most High.
He blessed him, and said, "Blessed be Abram of God Most High,
possessor of heaven and earth:
and blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies
into your hand."  Abram gave him a tenth of all.
The king of Sodom said to Abram, "Give me the people,
and take the goods to yourself."
Abram said to the king of Sodom, "I have lifted up my hand
to Yahweh, God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth,
that I will not take a thread nor a sandal strap nor anything
that is yours, lest you should say, 'I have made Abram rich.'
I will accept nothing from you except that which the young men
have eaten, and the portion of the men who went with me:
Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre.  Let them take their portion."
After these things the word of Yahweh came to Abram in
a vision, saying, "Don't be afraid, Abram.  I am your shield,
your exceedingly great reward."
Abram said, "Lord Yahweh, what will you give me, seeing I
go childless, and he who will inherit my estate is
Eliezer of Damascus?"
Abram said, "Behold, to me you have given no seed:
and, behold, one born in my house is my heir."
Behold, the word of Yahweh came to him, saying, "This man will
not be your heir, but he who will come forth out of your own
body will be your heir."
Yahweh brought him outside, and said, "Look now toward the sky,
and count the stars, if you are able to count them."
He said to Abram, "So shall your seed be."
He believed in Yahweh; and he reckoned it to him for righteousness.
He said to him, "I am Yahweh who brought you out of Ur
of the Chaldees, to give you this land to inherit it."
He said, "Lord Yahweh, how will I know that I will inherit it?"
He said to him, "Bring me a heifer three years old, a female
goat three years old, a ram three years old, a turtledove,
and a young pigeon."
He brought him all of these, and divided them in the middle,
and laid each half opposite the other; but he didn't
divide the birds.
The birds of prey came down on the carcasses, and Abram
drove them away.
When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell on Abram.
Now terror and great darkness fell on him.
He said to Abram, "Know for sure that your seed will live as
foreigners in a land that is not theirs, and will serve them.
They will afflict them four hundred years.
I will also judge that nation, whom they will serve.
Afterward they will come out with great wealth,
but you will go to your fathers in peace.  You will be buried
in a good old age.
In the fourth generation they will come here again,
for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full."
It came to pass that, when the sun went down, and it
was dark, behold, a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch
passed between these pieces.
In that day Yahweh made a covenant with Abram, saying, "To your
seed I have given this land, from the river of Egypt to
the great river, the river Euphrates:
the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites,
the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim,
the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Girgashites, and the Jebusites."
Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no children.  She had a handmaid,
an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
Sarai said to Abram, "See now, Yahweh has restrained me from bearing.
Please go in to my handmaid.  It may be that I will obtain
children by her."  Abram listened to the voice of Sarai.
Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid,
after Abram had lived ten years in the land of Canaan,
and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.
He went in to Hagar, and she conceived.  When she saw that she
had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
Sarai said to Abram, "This wrong is your fault.
I gave my handmaid into your bosom, and when she saw
that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes.
Yahweh judge between me and you."
But Abram said to Sarai, "Behold, your maid is in your hand.
Do to her whatever is good in your eyes."  Sarai dealt harshly
with her, and she fled from her face.
The angel of Yahweh found her by a fountain of water in
the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
He said, "Hagar, Sarai's handmaid, where did you come from?
Where are you going?"  She said, "I am fleeing from the face
of my mistress Sarai."
The angel of Yahweh said to her, "Return to your mistress,
and submit yourself under her hands."
The angel of Yahweh said to her, "I will greatly multiply
your seed, that they will not be numbered for multitude."
The angel of Yahweh said to her, "Behold, you are with child,
and will bear a son.  You shall call his name Ishmael,
because Yahweh has heard your affliction.
He will be like a wild donkey among men.  His hand will
be against every man, and every man's hand against him.
He will live opposite all of his brothers."
She called the name of Yahweh who spoke to her, "You are
a God who sees," for she said, "Have I even stayed alive
after seeing him?"
Therefore the well was called Beer Lahai Roi. Behold,
it is between Kadesh and Bered.
Hagar bore a son for Abram.  Abram called the name of his son,
whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.
Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram.
When Abram was ninety-nine years old, Yahweh appeared to Abram,
and said to him, "I am God Almighty.  Walk before me,
and be blameless.
I will make my covenant between me and you, and will
multiply you exceedingly."
Abram fell on his face.  God talked with him, saying,
"As for me, behold, my covenant is with you.  You will be
the father of a multitude of nations.
Neither will your name any more be called Abram, but your
name will be Abraham; for I have made you the father of a
multitude of nations.
I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of you.
Kings will come out of you.
I will establish my covenant between me and you and your seed
after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant,
to be a God to you and to your seed after you.
I will give to you, and to your seed after you, the land
where you are traveling, all the land of Canaan, for an
everlasting possession.  I will be their God."
God said to Abraham, "As for you, you will keep my covenant,
you and your seed after you throughout their generations.
This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me
and you and your seed after you.  Every male among you
shall be circumcised.
You shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin.
It will be a token of the covenant between me and you.
He who is eight days old will be circumcised among you,
every male throughout your generations, he who is born
in the house, or bought with money from any foreigner who is
not of your seed.
He who is born in your house, and he who is bought with your money,
must be circumcised.  My covenant will be in your flesh
for an everlasting covenant.
The uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh
of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
He has broken my covenant."
God said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you shall not
call her name Sarai, but her name will be Sarah.
I will bless her, and moreover I will give you a son by her.
Yes, I will bless her, and she will be a mother of nations.
Kings of peoples will come from her."
Then Abraham fell on his face, and laughed, and said in his heart,
"Will a child be born to him who is one hundred years old?
Will Sarah, who is ninety years old, give birth?"
Abraham said to God, "Oh that Ishmael might live before you!"
God said, "No, but Sarah, your wife, will bear you a son.
You shall call his name Isaac. I
will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant
for his seed after him.
As for Ishmael, I have heard you.  Behold, I have blessed him,
and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly.
He will become the father of twelve princes, and I will make
him a great nation.
But my covenant I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear
to you at this set time next year."
When he finished talking with him, God went up from Abraham.
Abraham took Ishmael his son, all who were born in his house,
and all who were bought with his money; every male among
the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their
foreskin in the same day, as God had said to him.
Abraham was ninety-nine years old, when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin.
Ishmael, his son, was thirteen years old when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the same day both Abraham and Ishmael, his son, were circumcised.
All the men of his house, those born in the house, and those
bought with money of a foreigner, were circumcised with him.
Yahweh appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day.
He lifted up his eyes and looked, and saw that three men
stood opposite him.  When he saw them, he ran to meet them
from the tent door, and bowed himself to the earth,
and said, "My lord, if now I have found favor in your sight,
please don't go away from your servant.
Now let a little water be fetched, wash your feet, and rest
yourselves under the tree.
I will get a morsel of bread so you can refresh your heart.
After that you may go your way, now that you have come to
your servant."  They said, "Very well, do as you have said."
Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah, and said, "Quickly make
ready three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes."
Abraham ran to the herd, and fetched a tender and good calf,
and gave it to the servant.  He hurried to dress it.
He took butter, milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
and set it before them.  He stood by them under the tree,
and they ate.
They said to him, "Where is Sarah, your wife?
He said, "See, in the tent."
He said, "I will certainly return to you when the season
comes round.  Behold, Sarah your wife will have a son."
Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old, well advanced in age.
It had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
Sarah laughed within herself, saying, "After I have grown old
will I have pleasure, my lord being old also?"
Yahweh said to Abraham, "Why did Sarah laugh, saying, 'Will I
really bear a child, yet I am old?'
Is anything too hard for Yahweh?  At the set time I will return
to you, when the season comes round, and Sarah will have a son."
Then Sarah denied, saying, "I didn't laugh," for she was afraid.
He said, "No, but you did laugh."
The men rose up from there, and looked toward Sodom.
Abraham went with them to see them on their way.
Yahweh said, "Will I hide from Abraham what I do,
seeing that Abraham has surely become a great and mighty nation,
and all the nations of the earth will be blessed in him?
For I have known him, to the end that he may command his
children and his household after him, that they may keep
the way of Yahweh, to do righteousness and justice;
to the end that Yahweh may bring on Abraham that which he has
spoken of him."
Yahweh said, "Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
and because their sin is very grievous,
I will go down now, and see whether their deeds are as bad
as the reports which have come to me.  If not, I will know."
The men turned from there, and went toward Sodom, but Abraham
stood yet before Yahweh.
Abraham drew near, and said, "Will you consume the righteous
with the wicked?
What if there are fifty righteous within the city?
Will you consume and not spare the place for the fifty
righteous who are in it?
Be it far from you to do things like that, to kill the righteous
with the wicked, so that the righteous should be like the wicked.
May that be far from you.  Shouldn't the Judge of all
the earth do right?"
Yahweh said, "If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city,
then I will spare all the place for their sake."
Abraham answered, "See now, I have taken it on myself to speak
to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes.
What if there will lack five of the fifty righteous?
Will you destroy all the city for lack of five?"  He said,
"I will not destroy it, if I find forty-five there."
He spoke to him yet again, and said, "What if there are forty
found there?"  He said, "I will not do it for the forty's sake."
He said, "Oh don't let the Lord be angry, and I will speak.
What if there are thirty found there?"  He said, "I will not
do it, if I find thirty there."
He said, "See now, I have taken it on myself to speak to the Lord.
What if there are twenty found there?"  He said, "I will not
destroy it for the twenty's sake."
He said, "Oh don't let the Lord be angry, and I will
speak just once more.  What if ten are found there?"
He said, "I will not destroy it for the ten's sake."
Yahweh went his way, as soon as he had finished communing
with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.
The two angels came to Sodom at evening.  Lot sat in the gate
of Sodom.  Lot saw them, and rose up to meet them.
He bowed himself with his face to the earth,
and he said, "See now, my lords, please turn aside into
your servant's house, stay all night, wash your feet,
and you will rise up early, and go on your way."
They said, "No, but we will stay in the street all night."
He urged them greatly, and they came in with him, and entered
into his house.  He made them a feast, and baked unleavened bread,
and they ate.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom,
surrounded the house, both young and old, all the people
from every quarter.
They called to Lot, and said to him, "Where are the men
who came in to you this night?  Bring them out to us,
that we may have sex with them."
Lot went out to them to the door, and shut the door after him.
He said, "Please, my brothers, don't act so wickedly.
See now, I have two virgin daughters.  Please let me bring them
out to you, and you may do to them what seems good to you.
Only don't do anything to these men, because they have come
under the shadow of my roof."
They said, "Stand back!"  They said, "This one fellow came
in to live as a foreigner, and he appoints himself a judge.
Now will we deal worse with you, than with them!"
They pressed hard on the man Lot, and drew near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand, and brought Lot into the house
to them, and shut the door.
They struck the men who were at the door of the house
with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied
themselves to find the door.
The men said to Lot, "Do you have anybody else here?
Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and whoever you
have in the city, bring them out of the place:
for we will destroy this place, because the outcry against
them has grown great before Yahweh that Yahweh has sent us
to destroy it."
Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law, who were
pledged to marry his daughters, and said, "Get up!
Get out of this place, for Yahweh will destroy the city."
But he seemed to his sons-in-law to be joking.
When the morning came, then the angels hurried Lot, saying, "Get up!
Take your wife, and your two daughters who are here,
lest you be consumed in the iniquity of the city."
But he lingered; and the men grabbed his hand, his wife's hand,
and his two daughters' hands, Yahweh being merciful to him;
and they took him out, and set him outside of the city.
It came to pass, when they had taken them out, that he said,
"Escape for your life!  Don't look behind you, and don't
stay anywhere in the plain.  Escape to the mountains,
lest you be consumed!"
Lot said to them, "Oh, not so, my lord.
See now, your servant has found favor in your sight, and you
have magnified your loving kindness, which you have shown
to me in saving my life.  I can't escape to the mountain,
lest evil overtake me, and I die.
See now, this city is near to flee to, and it is a little one.
Oh let me escape there (isn't it a little one?), and my
soul will live."
He said to him, "Behold, I have granted your request concerning
this thing also, that I will not overthrow the city of which
you have spoken.
Hurry, escape there, for I can't do anything until you get there."
Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
The sun had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
Then Yahweh rained on Sodom and on Gomorrah sulfur and fire
from Yahweh out of the sky.
He overthrew those cities, all the plain, all the inhabitants
of the cities, and that which grew on the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became
a pillar of salt.
Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he had
stood before Yahweh.
He looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land
of the plain, and looked, and saw that the smoke of the land
went up as the smoke of a furnace.
It happened, when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the middle
of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot lived.
Lot went up out of Zoar, and lived in the mountain, and his
two daughters with him; for he was afraid to live in Zoar.
He lived in a cave with his two daughters.
The firstborn said to the younger, "Our father is old,
and there is not a man in the earth to come in to us after
the manner of all the earth.
Come, let's make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him,
that we may preserve our father's seed."
They made their father drink wine that night:
and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father.
He didn't know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
It came to pass on the next day, that the firstborn said
to the younger, "Behold, I lay last night with my father.
Let us make him drink wine again, tonight.  You go in,
and lie with him, that we may preserve our father's seed."
They made their father drink wine that night also.
The younger went and lay with him.  He didn't know when she
lay down, nor when she got up.
Thus both of Lot's daughters were with child by their father.
The firstborn bore a son, and named him Moab.  He is the father
of the Moabites to this day.
The younger also bore a son, and called his name Ben Ammi.
He is the father of the children of Ammon to this day.
Abraham traveled from there toward the land of the South, and lived
between Kadesh and Shur.  He lived as a foreigner in Gerar.
Abraham said about Sarah his wife, "She is my sister."
Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said
to him, "Behold, you are a dead man, because of the woman
whom you have taken.  For she is a man's wife."
Now Abimelech had not come near her.  He said, "Lord, will you
kill even a righteous nation?
Didn't he tell me, 'She is my sister?'  She, even she herself,
said, 'He is my brother.'  In the integrity of my heart
and the innocence of my hands have I done this."
God said to him in the dream, "Yes, I know that in the integrity
of your heart you have done this, and I also withheld you
from sinning against me.  Therefore I didn't allow you
to touch her.
Now therefore, restore the man's wife.  For he is a prophet,
and he will pray for you, and you will live.  If you don't
restore her, know for sure that you will die, you, and all
who are yours."
Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all
his servants, and told all these things in their ear.
The men were very scared.
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said to him,
"What have you done to us?  How have I sinned against you,
that you have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
You have done deeds to me that ought not to be done!"
Abimelech said to Abraham, "What did you see, that you have
done this thing?"
Abraham said, "Because I thought, 'Surely the fear of God is
not in this place.  They will kill me for my wife's sake.'
Besides, she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father,
but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
It happened, when God caused me to wander from my father's house,
that I said to her, 'This is your kindness which you shall show
to me.  Everywhere that we go, say of me, "He is my brother."'"
Abimelech took sheep and oxen, male servants and female servants,
and gave them to Abraham, and restored Sarah, his wife, to him.
Abimelech said, "Behold, my land is before you.
Dwell where it pleases you."
To Sarah he said, "Behold, I have given your brother a thousand
pieces of silver.  Behold, it is for you a covering of the eyes
to all that are with you.  In front of all you are vindicated."
Abraham prayed to God.  God healed Abimelech, and his wife,
and his female servants, and they bore children.
For Yahweh had closed up tight all the wombs of the house
of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
Yahweh visited Sarah as he had said, and Yahweh did to Sarah
as he had spoken.
Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age,
at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
Abraham called his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore
to him, Isaac.
Abraham circumcised his son, Isaac, when he was eight days old,
as God had commanded him.
Abraham was one hundred years old when his son, Isaac,
was born to him.
Sarah said, "God has made me laugh.  Everyone who hears will
laugh with me."
She said, "Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarah would
nurse children?  For I have borne him a son in his old age."
The child grew, and was weaned.  Abraham made a great feast
on the day that Isaac was weaned.
Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne
to Abraham, mocking.
Therefore she said to Abraham, "Cast out this handmaid and her son!
For the son of this handmaid will not be heir with my son, Isaac."
The thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight on account
of his son.
God said to Abraham, "Don't let it be grievous in your
sight because of the boy, and because of your handmaid.
In all that Sarah says to you, listen to her voice.
For from Isaac will your seed be called.
I will also make a nation of the son of the handmaid,
because he is your seed."
Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle
of water, and gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder;
and gave her the child, and sent her away.  She departed,
and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
The water in the bottle was spent, and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.
She went and sat down opposite him, a good way off, about a bow
shot away.  For she said, "Don't let me see the death of the child."
She sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept.
God heard the voice of the boy.  The angel of God called
to Hagar out of the sky, and said to her, "What ails
you, Hagar?  Don't be afraid.  For God has heard the voice
of the boy where he is.
Get up, lift up the boy, and hold him in your hand.
For I will make him a great nation."
God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water.  She went,
filled the bottle with water, and gave the boy drink.
God was with the boy, and he grew.  He lived in the wilderness,
and became, as he grew up, an archer.
He lived in the wilderness of Paran.  His mother took a wife
for him out of the land of Egypt.
It happened at that time, that Abimelech and Phicol the captain
of his army spoke to Abraham, saying, "God is with you in all
that you do.
Now, therefore, swear to me here by God that you will not deal
falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son.
But according to the kindness that I have done to you,
you shall do to me, and to the land in which you have lived
as a foreigner."
Abraham said, "I will swear."
Abraham complained to Abimelech because of a water well,
which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.
Abimelech said, "I don't know who has done this thing.
Neither did you tell me, neither did I hear of it, until today."
Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech.
Those two made a covenant.
Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
Abimelech said to Abraham, "What do these seven ewe lambs
which you have set by themselves mean?"
He said, "You shall take these seven ewe lambs from my hand,
that it may be a witness to me, that I have dug this well."
Therefore he called that place Beersheba, because they
both swore there.
So they made a covenant at Beersheba.  Abimelech rose up
with Phicol, the captain of his army, and they returned
into the land of the Philistines.
Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and called there
on the name of Yahweh, the Everlasting God.
Abraham lived as a foreigner in the land of the Philistines
many days.
It happened after these things, that God tested Abraham,
and said to him, "Abraham!"  He said, "Here I am."
He said, "Now take your son, your only son, whom you love,
even Isaac, and go into the land of Moriah.  Offer him there
for a burnt offering on one of the mountains which I will
tell you of."
Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his donkey,
and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son.
He split the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up,
and went to the place of which God had told him.
On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw
the place far off.
Abraham said to his young men, "Stay here with the donkey.
The boy and I will go yonder.  We will worship, and come
back to you."
Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it on
Isaac his son.  He took in his hand the fire and the knife.
They both went together.
Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, "My father?"
He said, "Here I am, my son."  He said, "Here is the fire
and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?"
Abraham said, "God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering,
my son."  So they both went together.
They came to the place which God had told him of.
Abraham built the altar there, and laid the wood in order,
bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar, on the wood.
Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to
kill his son.
The angel of Yahweh called to him out of the sky, and said,
"Abraham, Abraham!"  He said, "Here I am."
He said, "Don't lay your hand on the boy, neither do anything to him.
For now I know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld
your son, your only son, from me."
Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and saw that behind
him was a ram caught in the thicket by his horns.
Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt
offering instead of his son.
Abraham called the name of that place Yahweh Will Provide.
As it is said to this day,
"On Yahweh's mountain, it will be provided."
The angel of Yahweh called to Abraham a second time out
of the sky,
and said, "I have sworn by myself, says Yahweh, because you
have done this thing, and have not withheld your son,
your only son,
that I will bless you greatly, and I will multiply your seed
greatly like the stars of the heavens, and like the sand
which is on the seashore.  Your seed will possess the gate
of his enemies.
In your seed will all the nations of the earth be blessed,
because you have obeyed my voice."
So Abraham returned to his young men, and they rose up and went
together to Beersheba.  Abraham lived at Beersheba.
It happened after these things, that it was told Abraham,
saying, "Behold, Milcah, she also has borne children to
your brother Nahor:
Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kemuel the father of Aram,
Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel."
Bethuel became the father of Rebekah.  These eight Milcah bore
to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore
Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.
Sarah lived one hundred twenty-seven years.  This was the length
of Sarah's life.
Sarah died in Kiriath Arba (the same is Hebron), in the land
of Canaan.  Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
Abraham rose up from before his dead, and spoke to the children
of Heth, saying,
"I am a stranger and a foreigner living with you.
Give me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I
may bury my dead out of my sight."
The children of Heth answered Abraham, saying to him,
"Hear us, my lord.  You are a prince of God among us.
Bury your dead in the best of our tombs.  None of us will
withhold from you his tomb.  Bury your dead."
Abraham rose up, and bowed himself to the people of the land,
even to the children of Heth.
He talked with them, saying, "If it be your mind that I should
bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me
to Ephron the son of Zohar,
that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has,
which is in the end of his field.  For the full price let him
give it to me among you for a possession of a burying-place."
Now Ephron was sitting in the middle of the children of Heth.
Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of
the children of Heth, even of all who went in at the gate
of his city, saying,
"No, my lord, hear me.  I give you the field, and I give you
the cave that is in it.  In the presence of the children
of my people I give it to you.  Bury your dead."
Abraham bowed himself down before the people of the land.
He spoke to Ephron in the audience of the people of
the land, saying, "But if you will, please hear me.
I will give the price of the field.  Take it from me,
and I will bury my dead there."
Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
"My lord, listen to me.  What is a piece of land worth
four hundred shekels of silver between me and you?
Therefore bury your dead."
Abraham listened to Ephron.  Abraham weighed to Ephron
the silver which he had named in the audience of the children
of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, according to the
current merchants' standard.
So the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was
before Mamre, the field, the cave which was in it,
and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all
of its borders, were deeded
to Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth, before all who went in at the gate of his city.
After this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave
of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (that is, Hebron),
in the land of Canaan.
The field, and the cave that is in it, were deeded to Abraham
for a possession of a burying place by the children of Heth.
Abraham was old, and well stricken in age.  Yahweh had blessed
Abraham in all things.
Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who ruled
over all that he had, "Please put your hand under my thigh.
I will make you swear by Yahweh, the God of heaven and the God
of the earth, that you shall not take a wife for my son
of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I live.
But you shall go to my country, and to my relatives, and take
a wife for my son Isaac."
The servant said to him, "What if the woman isn't willing
to follow me to this land?  Must I bring your son again
to the land you came from?"
Abraham said to him, "Beware that you don't bring my
son there again.
Yahweh, the God of heaven, who took me from my father's house,
and from the land of my birth, who spoke to me, and who swore
to me, saying, 'I will give this land to your seed.'
He will send his angel before you, and you shall take a wife
for my son from there.
If the woman isn't willing to follow you, then you shall
be clear from this my oath.  Only you shall not bring my
son there again."
The servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,
and swore to him concerning this matter.
The servant took ten camels, of his master's camels, and departed,
having a variety of good things of his master's with him.
He arose, and went to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor.
He made the camels kneel down outside the city by the well
of water at the time of evening, the time that women go out
to draw water.
He said, "Yahweh, the God of my master Abraham, please give me
success this day, and show kindness to my master Abraham.
Behold, I am standing by the spring of water.  The daughters
of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
Let it happen, that the young lady to whom I will say,
'Please let down your pitcher, that I may drink,' and she
will say, 'Drink, and I will also give your camels a drink,'--
let her be the one you have appointed for your servant Isaac.
By this I will know that you have shown kindness to my master."
It happened, before he had finished speaking, that behold,
Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah,
the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher
on her shoulder.
The young lady was very beautiful to look at, a virgin,
neither had any man known her.  She went down to the spring,
filled her pitcher, and came up.
The servant ran to meet her, and said, "Please give me a drink,
a little water from your pitcher."
She said, "Drink, my lord."  She hurried, and let down her
pitcher on her hand, and gave him drink.
When she had done giving him drink, she said, "I will also draw
for your camels, until they have done drinking."
She hurried, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran
again to the well to draw, and drew for all his camels.
The man looked steadfastly at her, remaining silent, to know
whether Yahweh had made his journey prosperous or not.
It happened, as the camels had done drinking, that the man
took a golden ring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
and said, "Whose daughter are you?  Please tell me.
Is there room in your father's house for us to lodge in?"
She said to him, "I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah,
whom she bore to Nahor."
She said moreover to him, "We have both straw and provender enough,
and room to lodge in."
The man bowed his head, and worshiped Yahweh.
He said, "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of my master Abraham, who has
not forsaken his loving kindness and his truth toward my master.
As for me, Yahweh has led me in the way to the house of
my master's relatives."
The young lady ran, and told her mother's house about these words.
Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban.  Laban ran
out to the man, to the spring.
It happened, when he saw the ring, and the bracelets on his
sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah
his sister, saying, "This is what the man said to me,"
that he came to the man.  Behold, he was standing by the camels
at the spring.
He said, "Come in, you blessed of Yahweh.  Why do you stand outside?
For I have prepared the house, and room for the camels."
The man came into the house, and he unloaded the camels.
He gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash
his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
Food was set before him to eat, but he said, "I will not eat
until I have told my message."  He said, "Speak on."
He said, "I am Abraham's servant.
Yahweh has blessed my master greatly.  He has become great.
He has given him flocks and herds, silver and gold,
male servants and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
Sarah, my master's wife, bore a son to my master when she was old.
He has given all that he has to him.
My master made me swear, saying, 'You shall not take a wife
for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose
land I live,
but you shall go to my father's house, and to my relatives,
and take a wife for my son.'
I said to my master, 'What if the woman will not follow me?'
He said to me, 'Yahweh, before whom I walk, will send his
angel with you, and prosper your way.  You shall take a wife
for my son of my relatives, and of my father's house.
Then will you be clear from my oath, when you come to my relatives.
If they don't give her to you, you shall be clear from my oath.'
I came this day to the spring, and said, 'Yahweh, the God
of my master Abraham, if now you do prosper my way which I go--
behold, I am standing by this spring of water.  Let it happen,
that the maiden who comes forth to draw, to whom I will say,
"Give me, I pray you, a little water from your pitcher to drink,"
and she will tell me, "Drink, and I will also draw for
your camels,"--let her be the woman whom Yahweh has appointed
for my master's son.'
Before I had done speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth
with her pitcher on her shoulder.  She went down to the spring,
and drew.  I said to her, 'Please let me drink.'
She hurried and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, 'Drink, and I will also give your camels a drink.'
So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
I asked her, and said, 'Whose daughter are you?'  She said,
'The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him.'
I put the ring on her nose, and the bracelets on her hands.
I bowed my head, and worshiped Yahweh, and blessed Yahweh,
the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.
Now if you will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me.
If not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand,
or to the left."
Then Laban and Bethuel answered, "The thing proceeds from Yahweh.
We can't speak to you bad or good.
Behold, Rebekah is before you.  Take her, and go, and let
her be your master's son's wife, as Yahweh has spoken."
It happened that when Abraham's servant heard their words,
he bowed himself down to the earth to Yahweh.
The servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
and clothing, and gave them to Rebekah.  He also gave precious
things to her brother and her mother.
They ate and drank, he and the men who were with him,
and stayed all night.  They rose up in the morning, and he said,
"Send me away to my master."
Her brother and her mother said, "Let the young lady stay
with us a few days, at least ten.  After that she will go."
He said to them, "Don't hinder me, seeing Yahweh has prospered
my way.  Send me away that I may go to my master."
They said, "We will call the young lady, and ask her."
They called Rebekah, and said to her, "Will you go with this man?"
She said, "I will go."
They sent away Rebekah, their sister, with her nurse,
Abraham's servant, and his men.
They blessed Rebekah, and said to her, "Our sister, may you
be the mother of thousands of ten thousands, and let your seed
possess the gate of those who hate them."
Rebekah arose with her ladies.  They rode on the camels,
and followed the man.  The servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
Isaac came from the way of Beer Lahai Roi, for he lived
in the land of the South.
Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the evening.
He lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, there
were camels coming.
Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac,
she dismounted from the camel.
She said to the servant, "Who is the man who is walking in
the field to meet us?"  The servant said, "It is my master."
She took her veil, and covered herself.
The servant told Isaac all the things that he had done.
Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent,
and took Rebekah, and she became his wife.  He loved her.
Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah.
She bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.
Jokshan became the father of Sheba, and Dedan.  The sons
of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim.
The sons of Midian:  Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah.
All these were the children of Keturah.
Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac,
but to the sons of Abraham's concubines, Abraham gave gifts.
He sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived,
eastward, to the east country.
These are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived:
one hundred seventy-five years.
Abraham gave up the spirit, and died in a good old age,
an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people.
Isaac and Ishmael, his sons, buried him in the cave of Machpelah,
in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the Hittite,
which is before Mamre,
the field which Abraham purchased of the children of Heth.
Abraham was buried there with Sarah, his wife.
It happened after the death of Abraham that God blessed Isaac,
his son.  Isaac lived by Beer Lahai Roi.
Now this is the history of the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son,
whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bore to Abraham.
These are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names,
according to the order of their birth:  the firstborn
of Ishmael, Nebaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
Mishma, Dumah, Massa,
Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names,
by their villages, and by their encampments:  twelve princes,
according to their nations.
These are the years of the life of Ishmael:  one hundred
thirty-seven years.  He gave up the spirit and died,
and was gathered to his people.
They lived from Havilah to Shur that is before Egypt, as you
go toward Assyria.  He lived opposite all his relatives.
This is the history of the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son.
Abraham became the father of Isaac.
Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter
of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan Aram, the sister of Laban
the Syrian, to be his wife.
Isaac entreated Yahweh for his wife, because she was barren.
Yahweh was entreated by him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
The children struggled together within her.  She said,
"If it be so, why do I live?"  She went to inquire of Yahweh.
Yahweh said to her, Two nations are in your womb.
Two peoples will be separated from your body.
The one people will be stronger than the other people.
The elder will serve the younger.
When her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were
twins in her womb.
The first came out red all over, like a hairy garment.
They named him Esau.
After that, his brother came out, and his hand had hold on
Esau's heel.  He was named Jacob.  Isaac was sixty years old
when she bore them.
The boys grew.  Esau was a skillful hunter, a man of the field.
Jacob was a quiet man, living in tents.
Now Isaac loved Esau, because he ate his venison.
Rebekah loved Jacob.
Jacob boiled stew.  Esau came in from the field,
and he was famished.
Esau said to Jacob, "Please feed me with that same red stew,
for I am famished."  Therefore his name was called Edom.
Jacob said, "First, sell me your birthright."
Esau said, "Behold, I am about to die.  What good is the
birthright to me?"
Jacob said, "Swear to me first."  He swore to him.
He sold his birthright to Jacob.
Jacob gave Esau bread and stew of lentils.  He ate and drank,
rose up, and went his way.  So Esau despised his birthright.
There was a famine in the land, besides the first famine
that was in the days of Abraham.  Isaac went to Abimelech
king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
Yahweh appeared to him, and said, "Don't go down into Egypt.
Live in the land I will tell you about.
Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you, and will bless you.
For to you, and to your seed, I will give all these lands, and I
will establish the oath which I swore to Abraham your father.
I will multiply your seed as the stars of the sky, and will
give to your seed all these lands.  In your seed will all
the nations of the earth be blessed,
because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge,
my commandments, my statutes, and my laws."
Isaac lived in Gerar.
The men of the place asked him about his wife.  He said,
"She is my sister," for he was afraid to say, "My wife,"
lest, he thought, "the men of the place might kill me for Rebekah,
because she is beautiful to look at."
It happened, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech
king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, Isaac was caressing Rebekah, his wife.
Abimelech called Isaac, and said, "Behold, surely she is your wife.
Why did you say, 'She is my sister?'"  Isaac said to him,
"Because I said, 'Lest I die because of her.'"
Abimelech said, "What is this you have done to us?
One of the people might easily have lain with your wife,
and you would have brought guilt on us!"
Abimelech charged all the people, saying, "He who touches this
man or his wife will surely be put to death."
Isaac sowed in that land, and reaped in the same year one
hundred times what he planted.  Yahweh blessed him.
The man grew great, and grew more and more until he
became very great.
He had possessions of flocks, possessions of herds,
and a great household.  The Philistines envied him.
Now all the wells which his father's servants had dug in
the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped,
and filled with earth.
Abimelech said to Isaac, "Go from us, for you are much
mightier than we."
Isaac departed from there, encamped in the valley of Gerar,
and lived there.
Isaac dug again the wells of water, which they had dug in the days
of Abraham his father.  For the Philistines had stopped them
after the death of Abraham.  He called their names after
the names by which his father had called them.
Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and found there a well
of springing water.
The herdsmen of Gerar argued with Isaac's herdsmen, saying,
"The water is ours."  He called the name of the well Esek,
because they contended with him.
They dug another well, and they argued over that, also.
He called the name of it Sitnah.
He left that place, and dug another well.  They didn't
argue over that one.  He called it Rehoboth.  He said,
"For now Yahweh has made room for us, and we will be fruitful
in the land."
He went up from there to Beersheba.
Yahweh appeared to him the same night, and said, "I am
the God of Abraham your father.  Don't be afraid, for I am
with you, and will bless you, and multiply your seed for my
servant Abraham's sake."
He built an altar there, and called on the name of Yahweh,
and pitched his tent there.  There Isaac's servants dug a well.
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath his friend,
and Phicol the captain of his army.
Isaac said to them, "Why have you come to me, since you hate me,
and have sent me away from you?"
They said, "We saw plainly that Yahweh was with you.
We said, 'Let there now be an oath between us, even between us
and you, and let us make a covenant with you,
that you will do us no harm, as we have not touched you,
and as we have done to you nothing but good, and have sent
you away in peace.'  You are now the blessed of Yahweh."
He made them a feast, and they ate and drank.
They rose up some time in the morning, and swore one to another.
Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
It happened the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told
him concerning the well which they had dug, and said to him,
"We have found water."
He called it Shibah. Therefore
the name of the city is Beersheba to this day.
When Esau was forty years old, he took as wife Judith,
the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, the daughter
of Elon the Hittite.
They grieved Isaac's and Rebekah's spirits.
It happened, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim,
so that he could not see, he called Esau his elder son,
and said to him, "My son?"  He said to him, "Here I am."
He said, "See now, I am old.  I don't know the day of my death.
Now therefore, please take your weapons, your quiver and your bow,
and go out to the field, and take me venison.
Make me savory food, such as I love, and bring it to me,
that I may eat, and that my soul may bless you before I die."
Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son.
Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.
Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, "Behold, I heard
your father speak to Esau your brother, saying,
'Bring me venison, and make me savory food, that I may eat,
and bless you before Yahweh before my death.'
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which
I command you.
Go now to the flock, and get me from there two good kids
of the goats.  I will make them savory food for your father,
such as he loves.
You shall bring it to your father, that he may eat, so that
he may bless you before his death."
Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, "Behold, Esau my brother
is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.
What if my father touches me?  I will seem to him as a deceiver,
and I would bring a curse on myself, and not a blessing."
His mother said to him, "Let your curse be on me, my son.
Only obey my voice, and go get them for me."
He went, and got them, and brought them to his mother.
His mother made savory food, such as his father loved.
Rebekah took the good clothes of Esau, her elder son,
which were with her in the house, and put them on Jacob,
her younger son.
She put the skins of the kids of the goats on his hands,
and on the smooth of his neck.
She gave the savory food and the bread, which she had prepared,
into the hand of her son Jacob.
He came to his father, and said, "My father?"  He said, "Here I am.
Who are you, my son?"
Jacob said to his father, "I am Esau your firstborn.
I have done what you asked me to do.  Please arise, sit and eat
of my venison, that your soul may bless me."
Isaac said to his son, "How is it that you have found it so quickly,
my son?"  He said, "Because Yahweh your God gave me success."
Isaac said to Jacob, "Please come near, that I may feel you,
my son, whether you are really my son Esau or not."
Jacob went near to Isaac his father.  He felt him, and said,
"The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau."
He didn't recognize him, because his hands were hairy,
like his brother, Esau's hands.  So he blessed him.
He said, "Are you really my son Esau?"  He said, "I am."
He said, "Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison,
that my soul may bless you."  He brought it near to him, and he ate.
He brought him wine, and he drank.
His father Isaac said to him, "Come near now, and kiss me, my son."
He came near, and kissed him.  He smelled the smell of his clothing,
and blessed him, and said, "Behold, the smell of my son
is as the smell of a field which Yahweh has blessed.
God give you of the dew of the sky, of the fatness of the earth,
and plenty of grain and new wine.
Let peoples serve you, and nations bow down to you.
Be lord over your brothers.  Let your mother's sons
bow down to you.  Cursed be everyone who curses you.
Blessed be everyone who blesses you."
It happened, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob,
and Jacob had just gone out from the presence of Isaac his father,
that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
He also made savory food, and brought it to his father.
He said to his father, "Let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that your soul may bless me."
Isaac his father said to him, "Who are you?"  He said,
"I am your son, your firstborn, Esau."
Isaac trembled violently, and said, "Who, then, is he who has
taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before
you came, and have blessed him?  Yes, he will be blessed."
When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an
exceeding great and bitter cry, and said to his father,
"Bless me, even me also, my father."
He said, "Your brother came with deceit, and has taken
away your blessing."
He said, "Isn't he rightly named Jacob?  For he has
supplanted me these two times.  He took away my birthright.
See, now he has taken away my blessing."  He said, "Haven't you
reserved a blessing for me?"
Isaac answered Esau, "Behold, I have made him your lord,
and all his brothers have I given to him for servants.
With grain and new wine have I sustained him.  What then
will I do for you, my son?"
Esau said to his father, "Have you but one blessing, my father?
Bless me, even me also, my father."  Esau lifted up
his voice, and wept.
Isaac his father answered him, "Behold, of the fatness of the earth
will be your dwelling, and of the dew of the sky from above.
By your sword will you live, and you will serve your brother.
It will happen, when you will break loose, that you shall
shake his yoke from off your neck."
Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father
blessed him.  Esau said in his heart, "The days of mourning
for my father are at hand.  Then I will kill my brother Jacob."
The words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebekah.
She sent and called Jacob, her younger son, and said
to him, "Behold, your brother Esau comforts himself about you
by planning to kill you.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice.  Arise, flee to Laban,
my brother, in Haran.
Stay with him a few days, until your brother's fury turns away;
until your brother's anger turn away from you, and he forgets what
you have done to him.  Then I will send, and get you from there.
Why should I be bereaved of you both in one day?"
Rebekah said to Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of
the daughters of Heth.  If Jacob takes a wife of the daughters
of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land,
what good will my life do me?"
Isaac called Jacob, blessed him, and commanded him, "You shall
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paddan Aram, to the house of Bethuel your
mother's father.  Take a wife from there from the daughters
of Laban, your mother's brother.
May God Almighty bless you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you,
that you may be a company of peoples,
and give you the blessing of Abraham, to you, and to your seed
with you, that you may inherit the land where you travel,
which God gave to Abraham."
Isaac sent Jacob away.  He went to Paddan Aram to Laban, son of
Bethuel the Syrian, Rebekah's brother, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away
to Paddan Aram, to take him a wife from there, and that as
he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, "You shall not
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,"
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone
to Paddan Aram.
Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan didn't please Isaac,
his father.
Esau went to Ishmael, and took, besides the wives that he had,
Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister
of Nebaioth, to be his wife.
Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
He came to a certain place, and stayed there all night,
because the sun had set.  He took one of the stones of the place,
and put it under his head, and lay down in that place to sleep.
He dreamed.  Behold, a stairway set upon the earth, and the top
of it reached to heaven.  Behold, the angels of God ascending
and descending on it.
Behold, Yahweh stood above it, and said, "I am Yahweh,
the God of Abraham your father, and the God of Isaac.
The land whereon you lie, to you will I give it, and to your seed.
Your seed will be as the dust of the earth, and you will spread
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north,
and to the south.  In you and in your seed will all the families
of the earth be blessed.
Behold, I am with you, and will keep you, wherever you go,
and will bring you again into this land.  For I will not leave you,
until I have done that which I have spoken of to you."
Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, "Surely Yahweh
is in this place, and I didn't know it."
He was afraid, and said, "How dreadful is this place!
This is none other than God's house, and this is the
gate of heaven."
Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone
that he had put under his head, and set it up for a pillar,
and poured oil on the top of it.
He called the name of that place Bethel, but the name of the city
was Luz at the first.
Jacob vowed a vow, saying, "If God will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and clothing to put on,
so that I come again to my father's house in peace, and Yahweh
will be my God,
then this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, will be
God's house.  Of all that you will give me I will surely give
the tenth to you."
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to the land of
the children of the east.
He looked, and behold, a well in the field, and, behold, three flocks
of sheep lying there by it.  For out of that well they watered
the flocks.  The stone on the well's mouth was large.
There all the flocks were gathered.  They rolled the stone
from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone
again on the well's mouth in its place.
Jacob said to them, "My relatives, where are you from?"
They said, "We are from Haran."
He said to them, "Do you know Laban, the son of Nahor?"  They said,
"We know him."
He said to them, "Is it well with him?"  They said, "It is well.
See, Rachel, his daughter, is coming with the sheep."
He said, "Behold, it is still the middle of the day,
not time to gather the livestock together.  Water the sheep,
and go and feed them."
They said, "We can't, until all the flocks are gathered
together, and they roll the stone from the well's mouth.
Then we water the sheep."
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her
father's sheep, for she kept them.
It happened, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban,
his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother,
that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth,
and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that
he was Rebekah's son.  She ran and told her father.
It happened, when Laban heard the news of Jacob, his sister's son,
that he ran to meet Jacob, and embraced him, and kissed him,
and brought him to his house.  Jacob told Laban all these things.
Laban said to him, Surely you are my bone and my flesh.
He lived with him for a month.
Laban said to Jacob, "Because you are my brother, should you
therefore serve me for nothing?  Tell me, what will
your wages be?"
Laban had two daughters.  The name of the elder was Leah,
and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah's eyes were weak, but Rachel was beautiful in
form and attractive.
Jacob loved Rachel.  He said, "I will serve you seven years
for Rachel, your younger daughter."
Laban said, "It is better that I give her to you, than that I
should give her to another man.  Stay with me."
Jacob served seven years for Rachel.  They seemed to him
but a few days, for the love he had for her.
Jacob said to Laban, "Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled,
that I may go in to her."
Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
It happened in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter,
and brought her to him.  He went in to her.
Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid to his daughter Leah for a handmaid.
It happened in the morning that, behold, it was Leah.
He said to Laban, "What is this you have done to me?
Didn't I serve with you for Rachel?  Why then have
you deceived me?"
Laban said, "It is not done so in our place, to give the younger
before the firstborn.
Fulfill the week of this one, and we will give you the other
also for the service which you will serve with me yet
seven other years."
Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week.  He gave him Rachel
his daughter as wife.
Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah, his handmaid,
to be her handmaid.
He went in also to Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah,
and served with him yet seven other years.
Yahweh saw that Leah was hated, and he opened her womb,
but Rachel was barren.
Leah conceived, and bore a son, and she named him Reuben.
For she said, "Because Yahweh has looked at my affliction.
For now my husband will love me."
She conceived again, and bore a son, and said, "Because Yahweh has
heard that I am hated, he has therefore given me this son also."
She named him Simeon.
She conceived again, and bore a son.  Said, "Now this time will my
husband be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons."
Therefore was his name called Levi.
She conceived again, and bore a son.  She said, "This time
will I praise Yahweh."  Therefore she named him Judah.
Then she stopped bearing.
When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, Rachel envied
her sister.  She said to Jacob, "Give me children, or else
I will die."
Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said,
"Am I in God's place, who has withheld from you the fruit
of the womb?"
She said, "Behold, my maid Bilhah.  Go in to her, that she
may bear on my knees, and I also may obtain children by her."
She gave him Bilhah her handmaid as wife, and Jacob went
in to her.
Bilhah conceived, and bore Jacob a son.
Rachel said, "God has judged me, and has also heard my voice,
and has given me a son."  Therefore called she his name Dan.
Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid, conceived again, and bore Jacob
a second son.
Rachel said, "With mighty wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister,
and have prevailed."  She named him Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had finished bearing, she took Zilpah,
her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, bore Jacob a son.
Leah said, "How fortunate!"  She named him Gad.
Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, bore Jacob a second son.
Leah said, "Happy am I, for the daughters will call me happy."
She named him Asher.
Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes
in the field, and brought them to his mother, Leah.  Then Rachel
said to Leah, "Please give me some of your son's mandrakes."
She said to her, "Is it a small matter that you have taken away
my husband?  Would you take away my son's mandrakes, also?"
Rachel said, "Therefore he will lie with you tonight for
your son's mandrakes."
Jacob came from the field in the evening, and Leah went
out to meet him, and said, "You must come in to me;
for I have surely hired you with my son's mandrakes."
He lay with her that night.
God listened to Leah, and she conceived, and bore Jacob
a fifth son.
Leah said, "God has given me my hire, because I gave my handmaid
to my husband."  She named him Issachar.
Leah conceived again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob.
Leah said, "God has endowed me with a good dowry.  Now my
husband will live with me, because I have borne him six sons."
She named him Zebulun.
Afterwards, she bore a daughter, and named her Dinah.
God remembered Rachel, and God listened to her, and opened her womb.
She conceived, bore a son, and said, "God has taken
away my reproach."
She named him Joseph, saying,
"May Yahweh add another son to me."
It happened, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said
to Laban, "Send me away, that I may go to my own place,
and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served you,
and let me go; for you know my service with which I
have served you."
Laban said to him, "If now I have found favor in your eyes,
stay here, for I have divined that Yahweh has blessed me
for your sake."
He said, "Appoint me your wages, and I will give it."
He said to him, "You know how I have served you, and how your
livestock have fared with me.
For it was little which you had before I came, and it has increased
to a multitude.  Yahweh has blessed you wherever I turned.
Now when will I provide for my own house also?"
He said, "What shall I give you?"  Jacob said, "You shall
not give me anything.  If you will do this thing for me,
I will again feed your flock and keep it.
I will pass through all your flock today, removing from there
every speckled and spotted one, and every black one among
the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats.
This will be my hire.
So my righteousness will answer for me hereafter,
when you come concerning my hire that is before you.
Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats,
and black among the sheep, that might be with me,
will be counted stolen."
Laban said, "Behold, I desire it to be according to your word."
That day, he removed the male goats that were streaked and spotted,
and all the female goats that were speckled and spotted,
every one that had white in it, and all the black ones among
the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
He set three days' journey between himself and Jacob,
and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
Jacob took to himself rods of fresh poplar, almond, plane tree,
peeled white streaks in them, and made the white appear
which was in the rods.
He set the rods which he had peeled opposite the flocks in the
gutters in the watering-troughs where the flocks came to drink.
They conceived when they came to drink.
The flocks conceived before the rods, and the flocks brought
forth streaked, speckled, and spotted.
Jacob separated the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks
toward the streaked and all the black in the flock of Laban:
and he put his own droves apart, and didn't put them
into Laban's flock.
It happened, whenever the stronger of the flock conceived,
that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the flock
in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods;
but when the flock were feeble, he didn't put them in.
So the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
The man increased exceedingly, and had large flocks,
female servants and male servants, and camels and donkeys.
He heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, "Jacob has taken away
all that was our father's. From that which was our father's,
has he gotten all this wealth."
Jacob saw the expression on Laban's face, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.
Yahweh said to Jacob, "Return to the land of your fathers,
and to your relatives, and I will be with you."
Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his flock,
and said to them, "I see the expression on your father's face,
that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father
has been with me.
You know that I have served your father with all of my strength.
Your father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times,
but God didn't allow him to hurt me.
If he said this, 'The speckled will be your wages,' then all
the flock bore speckled.  If he said this, 'The streaked
will be your wages,' then all the flock bore streaked.
Thus God has taken away your father's livestock, and given
them to me.
It happened during mating season that I lifted up my eyes,
and saw in a dream, and behold, the male goats which leaped
on the flock were streaked, speckled, and grizzled.
The angel of God said to me in the dream, 'Jacob,' and I said,
'Here I am.'
He said, 'Now lift up your eyes, and behold, all the male goats
which leap on the flock are streaked, speckled, and grizzled,
for I have seen all that Laban does to you.
I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar, where you
vowed a vow to me.  Now arise, get out from this land,
and return to the land of your birth.'"
Rachel and Leah answered him, "Is there yet any portion
or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Aren't we accounted by him as foreigners?  For he has sold us,
and has also quite devoured our money.
For all the riches which God has taken away from our father,
that is ours and our children's. Now then, whatever God has
said to you, do."
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives on the camels,
and he took away all his livestock, and all his possessions
which he had gathered, including the livestock which
he had gained in Paddan Aram, to go to Isaac his father,
to the land of Canaan.
Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep:  and Rachel stole
the teraphim that were her father's.
Jacob deceived Laban the Syrian, in that he didn't tell him
that he was running away.
So he fled with all that he had.  He rose up, passed over the River,
and set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
Laban was told on the third day that Jacob had fled.
He took his relatives with him, and pursued after him
seven days' journey.  He overtook him in the mountain of Gilead.
God came to Laban, the Syrian, in a dream of the night,
and said to him, "Take heed to yourself that you don't speak
to Jacob either good or bad."
Laban caught up with Jacob.  Now Jacob had pitched his tent
in the mountain, and Laban with his relatives encamped
in the mountain of Gilead.
Laban said to Jacob, "What have you done, that you have deceived me,
and carried away my daughters like captives of the sword?
Why did you flee secretly, and deceive me, and didn't tell me,
that I might have sent you away with mirth and with songs,
with tambourine and with harp;
and didn't allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
Now have you done foolishly.
It is in the power of my hand to hurt you, but the God of your
father spoke to me last night, saying, 'Take heed to yourself
that you don't speak to Jacob either good or bad.'
Now, you want to be gone, because you greatly longed for your
father's house, but why have you stolen my gods?"
Jacob answered Laban, "Because I was afraid, for I said,
'Lest you should take your daughters from me by force.'
Anyone you find your gods with shall not live.
Before our relatives, discern what is yours with me, and take it."
For Jacob didn't know that Rachel had stolen them.
Laban went into Jacob's tent, into Leah's tent, and into
the tent of the two female servants; but he didn't find them.
He went out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the teraphim, put them in the camel's
saddle, and sat on them.  Laban felt about all the tent,
but didn't find them.
She said to her father, "Don't let my lord be angry that I
can't rise up before you; for the manner of women is on me."
He searched, but didn't find the teraphim.
Jacob was angry, and argued with Laban.  Jacob answered
Laban, "What is my trespass?  What is my sin, that you have
hotly pursued after me?
Now that you have felt around in all my stuff, what have you found
of all your household stuff?  Set it here before my relatives
and your relatives, that they may judge between us two.
These twenty years I have been with you.  Your ewes and your
female goats have not cast their young, and I haven't eaten
the rams of your flocks.
That which was torn of animals, I didn't bring to you.
I bore the loss of it.  Of my hand you required it,
whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
This was my situation:  in the day the drought consumed me,
and the frost by night; and my sleep fled from my eyes.
These twenty years I have been in your house.  I served you fourteen
years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock,
and you have changed my wages ten times.
Unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaac, had been with me, surely now you would have sent me
away empty.  God has seen my affliction and the labor of my hands,
and rebuked you last night."
Laban answered Jacob, "The daughters are my daughters,
the children are my children, the flocks are my flocks,
and all that you see is mine:  and what can I do this day to
these my daughters, or to their children whom they have borne?
Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I; and let it be
for a witness between me and you."
Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
Jacob said to his relatives, "Gather stones."  They took stones,
and made a heap.  They ate there by the heap.
Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha, but Jacob called it Galeed.
Laban said, "This heap is witness between me and you this day."
Therefore it was named Galeed
and Mizpah, for he said, "Yahweh watch between me and you,
when we are absent one from another.
If you afflict my daughters, or if you take wives besides
my daughters, no man is with us; behold, God is witness
between me and you."
Laban said to Jacob, "See this heap, and see the pillar,
which I have set between me and you.
May this heap be a witness, and the pillar be a witness,
that I will not pass over this heap to you, and that you
will not pass over this heap and this pillar to me, for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father,
judge between us."  Then Jacob swore by the fear of
his father, Isaac.
Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain, and called his
relatives to eat bread.  They ate bread, and stayed all night
in the mountain.
Early in the morning, Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them.  Laban departed and returned
to his place.
Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
When he saw them, Jacob said, "This is God's army."
He called the name of that place Mahanaim.
Jacob sent messengers in front of him to Esau, his brother,
to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
He commanded them, saying, "This is what you shall tell
my lord, Esau:  'This is what your servant, Jacob, says.
I have lived as a foreigner with Laban, and stayed until now.
I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, male servants, and female servants.
I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in your sight.'"
The messengers returned to Jacob, saying, "We came to your
brother Esau.  Not only that, but he comes to meet you,
and four hundred men with him."
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and was distressed.
He divided the people who were with him, and the flocks,
and the herds, and the camels, into two companies;
and he said, "If Esau comes to the one company, and strikes it,
then the company which is left will escape."
Jacob said, "God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, Yahweh, who said to me, 'Return to your country,
and to your relatives, and I will do you good,'
I am not worthy of the least of all the loving kindnesses,
and of all the truth, which you have shown to your servant;
for with just my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I
have become two companies.
Please deliver me from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau:
for I fear him, lest he come and strike me, and the mothers
with the children.
You said, 'I will surely do you good, and make your seed
as the sand of the sea, which can't be numbered because there
are so many.'"
He lodged there that night, and took from that which he had
with him, a present for Esau, his brother:
two hundred female goats and twenty male goats, two hundred
ewes and twenty rams,
thirty milk camels and their colts, forty cows, ten bulls,
twenty female donkeys and ten foals.
He delivered them into the hands of his servants, every herd
by itself, and said to his servants, "Pass over before me,
and put a space between herd and herd."
He commanded the foremost, saying, "When Esau, my brother, meets you,
and asks you, saying, 'Whose are you?  Where are you going?
Whose are these before you?'
Then you shall say, 'They are your servant, Jacob's. It is a
present sent to my lord, Esau.  Behold, he also is behind us.'"
He commanded also the second, and the third, and all that followed
the herds, saying, "This is how you shall speak to Esau,
when you find him.
You shall say, 'Not only that, but behold, your servant, Jacob,
is behind us.'"  For, he said, "I will appease him with the present
that goes before me, and afterward I will see his face.
Perhaps he will accept me."
So the present passed over before him, and he himself lodged
that night in the camp.
He rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two handmaids,
and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of the Jabbok.
He took them, and sent them over the stream, and sent over
that which he had.
Jacob was left alone, and wrestled with a man there until
the breaking of the day.
When he saw that he didn't prevail against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh
was strained, as he wrestled.
The man said, "Let me go, for the day breaks."  Jacob said,
"I won't let you go, unless you bless me."
He said to him, "What is your name?"  He said, "Jacob."
He said, "Your name will no longer be called Jacob, but Israel;
for you have fought with God and with men, and have prevailed."
Jacob asked him, "Please tell me your name."
He said, "Why is it that you ask what my name is?"
He blessed him there.
Jacob called the name of the place Peniel:
for, he said, "I have seen God face to face,
and my life is preserved."
The sun rose on him as he passed over Peniel, and he limped
because of his thigh.
Therefore the children of Israel don't eat the sinew of
the hip, which is on the hollow of the thigh, to this day,
because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew
of the hip.
Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau was coming,
and with him four hundred men.  He divided the children
between Leah, Rachel, and the two handmaids.
He put the handmaids and their children in front, Leah and her
children after, and Rachel and Joseph at the rear.
He himself passed over in front of them, and bowed himself
to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
Esau ran to meet him, embraced him, fell on his neck, kissed him,
and they wept.
He lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, "Who are these with you?"  He said, "The children
whom God has graciously given your servant."
Then the handmaids came near with their children,
and they bowed themselves.
Leah also and her children came near, and bowed themselves.
After them, Joseph came near with Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
Esau said, "What do you mean by all this company which I met?"
Jacob said, "To find favor in the sight of my lord."
Esau said, "I have enough, my brother; let that which you
have be yours."
Jacob said, "Please, no, if I have now found favor in your sight,
then receive my present at my hand, because I have seen your face,
as one sees the face of God, and you were pleased with me.
Please take the gift that I brought to you, because God has
dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough."
He urged him, and he took it.
Esau said, "Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I
will go before you."
Jacob said to him, "My lord knows that the children are tender,
and that the flocks and herds with me have their young,
and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will die.
Please let my lord pass over before his servant, and I
will lead on gently, according to the pace of the livestock
that are before me and according to the pace of the children,
until I come to my lord to Seir."
Esau said, "Let me now leave with you some of the folk who are
with me."  He said, "Why?  Let me find favor in the sight
of my lord."
So Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.
Jacob traveled to Succoth, built himself a house, and made
shelters for his livestock.  Therefore the name of the place
is called Succoth.
Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem, which is
in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan Aram;
and encamped before the city.
He bought the parcel of ground where he had spread his tent,
at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father,
for one hundred pieces of money.
He erected an altar there, and called it El Elohe Israel.
Dinah, the daughter of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob, went out
to see the daughters of the land.
Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her.
He took her, lay with her, and humbled her.
His soul joined to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he loved
the young lady, and spoke kindly to the young lady.
Shechem spoke to his father, Hamor, saying, "Get me this young
lady as a wife."
Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah, his daughter;
and his sons were with his livestock in the field.
Jacob held his peace until they came.
Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to talk with him.
The sons of Jacob came in from the field when they heard it.
The men were grieved, and they were very angry, because he
had done folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter;
a which thing ought not to be done.
Hamor talked with them, saying, "The soul of my son, Shechem,
longs for your daughter.  Please give her to him as a wife.
Make marriages with us.  Give your daughters to us, and take
our daughters for yourselves.
You shall dwell with us, and the land will be before you.
Live and trade in it, and get possessions in it."
Shechem said to her father and to her brothers, "Let me find
favor in your eyes, and whatever you will tell me I will give.
Ask me a great amount for a dowry, and I will give whatever
you ask of me, but give me the young lady as a wife."
The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father with deceit,
and spoke, because he had defiled Dinah their sister,
and said to them, "We can't do this thing, to give our sister
to one who is uncircumcised; for that is a reproach to us.
Only on this condition will we consent to you.  If you will
be as we are, that every male of you be circumcised;
then will we give our daughters to you, and we will take
your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we
will become one people.
But if you will not listen to us, to be circumcised, then we
will take our sister, and we will be gone."
Their words pleased Hamor and Shechem, Hamor's son.
The young man didn't wait to do this thing, because he had delight
in Jacob's daughter, and he was honored above all the house
of his father.
Hamor and Shechem, his son, came to the gate of their city,
and talked with the men of their city, saying,
"These men are peaceful with us.  Therefore let them live in the land
and trade in it.  For behold, the land is large enough for them.
Let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give
them our daughters.
Only on this condition will the men consent to us to live with us,
to become one people, if every male among us is circumcised,
as they are circumcised.
Won't their livestock and their possessions and all their
animals be ours?  Only let us give our consent to them,
and they will dwell with us."
All who went out of the gate of his city listened to Hamor,
and to Shechem his son; and every male was circumcised,
all who went out of the gate of his city.
It happened on the third day, when they were sore,
that two of Jacob's sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers,
each took his sword, came upon the unsuspecting city,
and killed all the males.
They killed Hamor and Shechem, his son, with the edge of the sword,
and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went away.
Jacob's sons came on the dead, and plundered the city,
because they had defiled their sister.
They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, that which
was in the city, that which was in the field,
and all their wealth.  They took captive all their little ones
and their wives, and took as plunder everything that was
in the house.
Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, "You have troubled me,
to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land,
among the Canaanites and the Perizzites.  I am few in number.
They will gather themselves together against me and strike me,
and I will be destroyed, I and my house."
They said, "Should he deal with our sister as with a prostitute?"
God said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and live there.
Make there an altar to God, who appeared to you when you fled
from the face of Esau your brother."
Then Jacob said to his household, and to all who were with him,
"Put away the foreign gods that are among you, purify yourselves,
change your garments.
Let us arise, and go up to Bethel.  I will make there
an altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress,
and was with me in the way which I went."
They gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in their hands,
and the rings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them
under the oak which was by Shechem.
They traveled, and a terror of God was on the cities that were
around them, and they didn't pursue the sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in the land
of Canaan, he and all the people who were with him.
He built an altar there, and called the place El Beth El;
because there God was revealed to him, when he fled from
the face of his brother.
Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and she was buried below Bethel
under the oak; and the name of it was called Allon Bacuth.
God appeared to Jacob again, when he came from Paddan Aram,
and blessed him.
God said to him, "Your name is Jacob.  Your name shall
not be Jacob any more, but your name will be Israel."
He named him Israel.
God said to him, "I am God Almighty.  Be fruitful and multiply.
A nation and a company of nations will be from you, and kings
will come out of your body.
The land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give it to you,
and to your seed after you will I give the land."
God went up from him in the place where he spoke with him.
Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spoke with him,
a pillar of stone.  He poured out a drink offering on it,
and poured oil on it.
Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him "Bethel."
They traveled from Bethel.  There was still some distance
to come to Ephrath, and Rachel travailed.  She had hard labor.
When she was in hard labor, the midwife said to her,
"Don't be afraid, for now you will have another son."
It happened, as her soul was departing (for she died),
that she named him Benoni, but his father named him Benjamin.
Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath
(the same is Bethlehem).
Jacob set up a pillar on her grave.  The same is the Pillar
of Rachel's grave to this day.
Israel traveled, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
It happened, while Israel lived in that land, that Reuben went and
lay with Bilhah, his father's concubine, and Israel heard of it.
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve.
The sons of Leah:  Reuben (Jacob's firstborn),
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
The sons of Rachel:  Joseph and Benjamin.
The sons of Bilhah (Rachel's handmaid):  Dan and Naphtali.
The sons of Zilpah (Leah's handmaid):  Gad and Asher.
These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan Aram.
Jacob came to Isaac his father, to Mamre, to Kiriath Arba
(which is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac lived as foreigners.
The days of Isaac were one hundred eighty years.
Isaac gave up the spirit, and died, and was gathered to his people,
old and full of days.  Esau and Jacob, his sons, buried him.
Now this is the history of the generations of Esau
(that is, Edom).
Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan:  Adah the daughter
of Elon, the Hittite; and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah,
the daughter of Zibeon, the Hivite;
and Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth.
Adah bore to Esau Eliphaz.  Basemath bore Reuel.
Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.  These are the sons
of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, and all the members
of his household, with his livestock, all his animals, and all
his possessions, which he had gathered in the land of Canaan,
and went into a land away from his brother Jacob.
For their substance was too great for them to dwell together,
and the land of their travels couldn't bear them because
of their livestock.
Esau lived in the hill country of Seir.  Esau is Edom.
This is the history of the generations of Esau the father
of the Edomites in the hill country of Seir:
these are the names of Esau's sons:  Eliphaz, the son
of Adah, the wife of Esau; and Reuel, the son of Basemath,
the wife of Esau.
The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son; and she bore
to Eliphaz Amalek.  These are the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Reuel:  Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
These were the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
These were the sons of Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah,
the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife:  she bore to
Esau Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau:  the sons of
Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau:  chief Teman, chief Omar,
chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek:  these are the chiefs
who came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are the
sons of Adah.
These are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son:
chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah:
these are the chiefs who came of Reuel in the land of Edom;
these are the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau's wife:  chief Jeush,
chief Jalam, chief Korah:  these are the chiefs who came
of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and these
are their chiefs.
These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land:
Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,
Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan.  These are the chiefs who came
of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
The children of Lotan were Hori and Heman.  Lotan's sister was Timna.
These are the children of Shobal:  Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho,
and Onam.
These are the children of Zibeon:  Aiah and Anah.
This is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness,
as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his father.
These are the children of Anah:  Dishon and Oholibamah,
the daughter of Anah.
These are the children of Dishon:  Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran,
and Cheran.
These are the children of Ezer:  Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.
These are the children of Dishan:  Uz and Aran.
These are the chiefs who came of the Horites:  chief Lotan,
chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
chief Dishon, chief Ezer, and chief Dishan:  these are
the chiefs who came of the Horites, according to their chiefs
in the land of Seir.
These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom,
before any king reigned over the children of Israel.
Bela, the son of Beor, reigned in Edom.  The name of his
city was Dinhabah.
Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zerah of Bozrah,
reigned in his place.
Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned
in his place.
Husham died, and Hadad, the son of Bedad, who struck
Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his place.
The name of his city was Avith.
Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his place.
Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the river,
reigned in his place.
Shaul died, and Baal Hanan, the son of Achbor reigned
in his place.
Baal Hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his place.
The name of his city was Pau.  His wife's name was Mehetabel,
the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
These are the names of the chiefs who came from Esau, according to
their families, after their places, and by their names:
chief Timna, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, and chief Iram.  These are the chiefs of Edom,
according to their habitations in the land of their possession.
This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
Jacob lived in the land of his father's travels, in the
land of Canaan.
This is the history of the generations of Jacob.  Joseph, being
seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brothers.
He was a boy with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's wives.
Joseph brought an evil report of them to their father.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
because he was the son of his old age, and he made him a coat
of many colors.
His brothers saw that their father loved him more than
all his brothers, and they hated him, and couldn't speak
peaceably to him.
Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brothers,
and they hated him all the more.
He said to them, "Please hear this dream which I have dreamed:
for behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold,
my sheaf arose and also stood upright; and behold, your sheaves
came around, and bowed down to my sheaf."
His brothers said to him, "Will you indeed reign over us?
Or will you indeed have dominion over us?"  They hated him
all the more for his dreams and for his words.
He dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brothers,
and said, "Behold, I have dreamed yet another dream:
and behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed
down to me."
He told it to his father and to his brothers.  His father rebuked him,
and said to him, "What is this dream that you have dreamed?
Will I and your mother and your brothers indeed come to bow
ourselves down to you to the earth?"
His brothers envied him, but his father kept this saying in mind.
His brothers went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
Israel said to Joseph, "Aren't your brothers feeding
the flock in Shechem?  Come, and I will send you to them."
He said to him, "Here I am."
He said to him, "Go now, see whether it is well with your brothers,
and well with the flock; and bring me word again."
So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
A certain man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field.
The man asked him, "What are you looking for?"
He said, "I am looking for my brothers.  Tell me, please,
where they are feeding the flock."
The man said, "They have left here, for I heard them say,
'Let us go to Dothan.'"  Joseph went after his brothers,
and found them in Dothan.
They saw him afar off, and before he came near to them,
they conspired against him to kill him.
They said one to another, "Behold, this dreamer comes.
Come now therefore, and let's kill him, and cast him into one
of the pits, and we will say, 'An evil animal has devoured him.'
We will see what will become of his dreams."
Reuben heard it, and delivered him out of their hand, and said,
"Let's not take his life."
Reuben said to them, "Shed no blood.  Throw him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand on him"--
that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him
to his father.
It happened, when Joseph came to his brothers, that they stripped
Joseph of his coat, the coat of many colors that was on him;
and they took him, and threw him into the pit.  The pit was empty.
There was no water in it.
They sat down to eat bread, and they lifted up their eyes and looked,
and saw a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead,
with their camels bearing spices and balm and myrrh,
going to carry it down to Egypt.
Judah said to his brothers, "What profit is it if we kill
our brother and conceal his blood?
Come, and let's sell him to the Ishmaelites, and not let
our hand be on him; for he is our brother, our flesh."
His brothers listened to him.
Midianites who were merchants passed by, and they drew and lifted
up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites
for twenty pieces of silver.  They brought Joseph into Egypt.
Reuben returned to the pit; and saw that Joseph wasn't in the pit;
and he tore his clothes.
He returned to his brothers, and said, "The child is no more;
and I, where will I go?"
They took Joseph's coat, and killed a male goat, and dipped
the coat in the blood.
They took the coat of many colors, and they brought
it to their father, and said, "We have found this.
Examine it, now, whether it is your son's coat or not."
He recognized it, and said, "It is my son's coat.
An evil animal has devoured him.  Joseph is without doubt
torn in pieces."
Jacob tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his waist,
and mourned for his son many days.
All his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him,
but he refused to be comforted.  He said, "For I will go down
to Sheol to my son mourning."
His father wept for him.
The Midianites sold him into Egypt to Potiphar, an officer
of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.
It happened at that time, that Judah went down from his brothers,
and visited a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name
was Shua.  He took her, and went in to her.
She conceived, and bore a son; and he named him Er.
She conceived again, and bore a son; and she named him Onan.
She yet again bore a son, and named him Shelah:
and he was at Chezib, when she bore him.
Judah took a wife for Er, his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Yahweh.
Yahweh killed him.
Judah said to Onan, "Go in to your brother's wife, and perform
the duty of a husband's brother to her, and raise up seed
to your brother."
Onan knew that the seed wouldn't be his; and it happened,
when he went in to his brother's wife, that he spilled it
on the ground, lest he should give seed to his brother.
The thing which he did was evil in the sight of Yahweh,
and he killed him also.
Then Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, "Remain a widow
in your father's house, until Shelah, my son, is grown up;"
for he said, "Lest he also die, like his brothers."
Tamar went and lived in her father's house.
After many days, Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah, died.
Judah was comforted, and went up to his sheepshearers to Timnah,
he and his friend Hirah, the Adullamite.
It was told Tamar, saying, "Behold, your father-in-law is going
up to Timnah to shear his sheep."
She took off of her the garments of her widowhood,
and covered herself with her veil, and wrapped herself,
and sat in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah;
for she saw that Shelah was grown up, and she wasn't given
to him as a wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought that she was a prostitute,
for she had covered her face.
He turned to her by the way, and said, "Please come,
let me come in to you," for he didn't know that she was
his daughter-in-law. She said, "What will you give me,
that you may come in to me?"
He said, "I will send you a kid of the goats from the flock."
She said, "Will you give me a pledge, until you send it?"
He said, "What pledge will I give you?"  She said, "Your signet
and your cord, and your staff that is in your hand."
He gave them to her, and came in to her, and she conceived by him.
She arose, and went away, and put off her veil from her,
and put on the garments of her widowhood.
Judah sent the kid of the goats by the hand of his friend,
the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the woman's hand,
but he didn't find her.
Then he asked the men of her place, saying, "Where is
the prostitute, that was at Enaim by the road?"  They said,
"There has been no prostitute here."
He returned to Judah, and said, "I haven't found her;
and also the men of the place said, 'There has been
no prostitute here.'"
Judah said, "Let her keep it, lest we be shamed.  Behold, I sent
this kid, and you haven't found her."
It happened about three months later, that it was told Judah,
saying, "Tamar, your daughter-in-law, has played the prostitute;
and moreover, behold, she is with child by prostitution."
Judah said, "Bring her forth, and let her be burnt."
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law,
saying, "By the man, whose these are, I am with child."
She also said, "Please discern whose are these--the signet,
and the cords, and the staff."
Judah acknowledged them, and said, "She is more righteous
than I, because I didn't give her to Shelah, my son."
He knew her again no more.
It happened in the time of her travail, that behold,
twins were in her womb.
When she travailed, one put out a hand, and the midwife took and tied
a scarlet thread on his hand, saying, "This came out first."
It happened, as he drew back his hand, that behold, his brother
came out, and she said, "Why have you made a breach for yourself?"
Therefore his name was called Perez.
Afterward his brother came out, that had the scarlet
thread on his hand, and his name was called Zerah.
Joseph was brought down to Egypt.  Potiphar, an officer
of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian,
bought him from the hand of the Ishmaelites that had brought
him down there.
Yahweh was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man.
He was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
His master saw that Yahweh was with him, and that Yahweh made
all that he did prosper in his hand.
Joseph found favor in his sight.  He ministered to him,
and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had
he put into his hand.
It happened from the time that he made him overseer in his house,
and over all that he had, that Yahweh blessed the Egyptian's
house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of Yahweh was on
all that he had, in the house and in the field.
He left all that he had in Joseph's hand.  He didn't concern
himself with anything, except for the food which he ate.
Joseph was well-built and handsome.
It happened after these things, that his master's wife cast
her eyes on Joseph; and she said, "Lie with me."
But he refused, and said to his master's wife, "Behold, my master
doesn't know what is with me in the house, and he has put
all that he has into my hand.
He isn't greater in this house than I, neither has he kept
back anything from me but you, because you are his wife.
How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?"
As she spoke to Joseph day by day, he didn't listen to her,
to lie by her, or to be with her.
About this time, he went into the house to do his work,
and there were none of the men of the house inside.
She caught him by his garment, saying, "Lie with me!"
He left his garment in her hand, and ran outside.
When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand,
and had run outside,
she called to the men of her house, and spoke to them,
saying, "Behold, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to mock us.
He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
It happened, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried,
that he left his garment by me, and ran outside."
She laid up his garment by her, until his master came home.
She spoke to him according to these words, saying, "The Hebrew
servant, whom you have brought to us, came in to me to mock me,
and it happened, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left
his garment by me, and ran outside."
It happened, when his master heard the words of his wife,
which she spoke to him, saying, "This is what your servant
did to me," that his wrath was kindled.
Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison,
the place where the king's prisoners were bound, and he was
there in custody.
But Yahweh was with Joseph, and showed kindness to him,
and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
The keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all
the prisoners who were in the prison.  Whatever they did there,
he was responsible for it.
The keeper of the prison didn't look after anything that was under
his hand, because Yahweh was with him; and that which he did,
Yahweh made it prosper.
It happened after these things, that the butler of the king
of Egypt and his baker offended their lord, the king of Egypt.
Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief cupbearer
and the chief baker.
He put them in custody in the house of the captain of the guard,
into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
The captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph, and he took
care of them.  They stayed in prison many days.
They both dreamed a dream, each man his dream, in one night,
each man according to the interpretation of his dream,
the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were
bound in the prison.
Joseph came in to them in the morning, and saw them, and saw
that they were sad.
He asked Pharaoh's officers who were with him in custody in his
master's house, saying, "Why do you look so sad today?"
They said to him, "We have dreamed a dream, and there
is no one who can interpret it."  Joseph said to them,
"Don't interpretations belong to God?  Please tell it to me."
The chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph, and said to him,
"In my dream, behold, a vine was in front of me,
and in the vine were three branches.  It was as though it budded,
its blossoms shot forth, and the clusters of it brought
forth ripe grapes.
Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took the grapes,
and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup
into Pharaoh's hand."
Joseph said to him, "This is the interpretation of it:
the three branches are three days.
Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head,
and restore you to your office.  You will give Pharaoh's cup
into his hand, the way you did when you were his cupbearer.
But remember me when it will be well with you, and show
kindness, please, to me, and make mention of me to Pharaoh,
and bring me out of this house.
For indeed, I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews,
and here also have I done nothing that they should put me
into the dungeon."
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good,
he said to Joseph, "I also was in my dream, and behold,
three baskets of white bread were on my head.
In the uppermost basket there was all kinds of baked food
for Pharaoh, and the birds ate them out of the basket
on my head."
Joseph answered, "This is the interpretation of it.
The three baskets are three days.
Within three more days, Pharaoh will lift up your head from
off you, and will hang you on a tree; and the birds will eat
your flesh from off you."
It happened the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday,
that he made a feast for all his servants, and he lifted up
the head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief
baker among his servants.
He restored the chief cupbearer to his position again,
and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand;
but he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet the chief cupbearer didn't remember Joseph, but forgot him.
It happened at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed:
and behold, he stood by the river.
Behold, there came up out of the river seven cattle, sleek and fat,
and they fed in the marsh grass.
Behold, seven other cattle came up after them out of the river,
ugly and thin, and stood by the other cattle on the brink
of the river.
The ugly and thin cattle ate up the seven sleek and fat cattle.
So Pharaoh awoke.
He slept and dreamed a second time:  and behold, seven heads
of grain came up on one stalk, healthy and good.
Behold, seven heads of grain, thin and blasted with the east wind,
sprung up after them.
The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven healthy and full ears.
Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
It happened in the morning that his spirit was troubled,
and he sent and called for all of Egypt's magicians and wise men.
Pharaoh told them his dreams, but there was no one who could
interpret them to Pharaoh.
Then the chief cupbearer spoke to Pharaoh, saying, "I remember
my faults today.
Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and put me in custody in
the house of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker.
We dreamed a dream in one night, I and he.  We dreamed each man
according to the interpretation of his dream.
There was with us there a young man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain
of the guard, and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams.
To each man according to his dream he interpreted.
It happened, as he interpreted to us, so it was:
he restored me to my office, and he hanged him."
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily
out of the dungeon.  He shaved himself, changed his clothing,
and came in to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, "I have dreamed a dream, and there
is no one who can interpret it.  I have heard it said of you,
that when you hear a dream you can interpret it."
Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, "It isn't in me.
God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace."
Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, "In my dream, behold, I stood on
the brink of the river:
and behold, there came up out of the river seven cattle,
fat and sleek.  They fed in the marsh grass,
and behold, seven other cattle came up after them, poor and
very ugly and thin, such as I never saw in all the land
of Egypt for ugliness.
The thin and ugly cattle ate up the first seven fat cattle,
and when they had eaten them up, it couldn't be known that they
had eaten them, but they were still ugly, as at the beginning.
So I awoke.
I saw in my dream, and behold, seven heads of grain came up
on one stalk, full and good:
and behold, seven heads of grain, withered, thin, and blasted
with the east wind, sprung up after them.
The thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven good heads of grain.
I told it to the magicians, but there was no one who could
explain it to me."
Joseph said to Pharaoh, "The dream of Pharaoh is one.
What God is about to do he has declared to Pharaoh.
The seven good cattle are seven years; and the seven good heads
of grain are seven years.  The dream is one.
The seven thin and ugly cattle that came up after them are
seven years, and also the seven empty heads of grain blasted
with the east wind; they will be seven years of famine.
That is the thing which I spoke to Pharaoh.  What God is about
to do he has shown to Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout
all the land of Egypt.
There will arise after them seven years of famine,
and all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of Egypt.
The famine will consume the land,
and the plenty will not be known in the land by reason of that
famine which follows; for it will be very grievous.
The dream was doubled to Pharaoh, because the thing is established
by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
"Now therefore let Pharaoh look for a discreet and wise man,
and set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint overseers over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt's produce
in the seven plenteous years.
Let them gather all the food of these good years that come,
and lay up grain under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities,
and let them keep it.
The food will be for a store to the land against the seven
years of famine, which will be in the land of Egypt;
that the land not perish through the famine."
The thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.
Pharaoh said to his servants, "Can we find such a one as this,
a man in whom is the Spirit of God?"
Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Because God has shown you all of this,
there is none so discreet and wise as you.
You shall be over my house, and according to your word
will all my people be ruled.  Only in the throne I will be
greater than you."
Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Behold, I have set you over all
the land of Egypt."
Pharaoh took off his signet ring from his hand, and put it
on Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in robes of fine linen,
and put a gold chain about his neck,
and he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had.
They cried before him, "Bow the knee!"  He set him over all
the land of Egypt.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, "I am Pharaoh, and without you shall
no man lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt."
Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenath-Paneah; and he gave
him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On as a wife.
Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.
Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king
of Egypt.  Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh,
and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
In the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth abundantly.
He gathered up all the food of the seven years which were
in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities:
the food of the field, which was round about every city,
he laid up in the same.
Joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he stopped counting, for it was without number.
To Joseph were born two sons before the year of famine came,
whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On,
bore to him.
Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh, "For," he said, "God has
made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house."
The name of the second, he called Ephraim: "For God has
made me fruitful in the land of my affliction."
The seven years of plenty, that were in the land of Egypt,
came to an end.
The seven years of famine began to come, just as Joseph had said.
There was famine in all lands, but in all the land of Egypt
there was bread.
When all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh
for bread, and Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, "Go to Joseph.
What he says to you, do."
The famine was over all the surface of the earth.
Joseph opened all the store houses, and sold to the Egyptians.
The famine was severe in the land of Egypt.
All countries came into Egypt, to Joseph, to buy grain,
because the famine was severe in all the earth.
Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt, and Jacob said
to his sons, "Why do you look at one another?"
He said, "Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt.
Go down there, and buy for us from there, so that we may live,
and not die."
Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
But Jacob didn't send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, with his brothers;
for he said, "Lest perhaps harm happen to him."
The sons of Israel came to buy among those who came,
for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
Joseph was the governor over the land.  It was he who sold
to all the people of the land.  Joseph's brothers came,
and bowed themselves down to him with their faces to the earth.
Joseph saw his brothers, and he recognized them, but acted
like a stranger to them, and spoke roughly with them.
He said to them, "Where did you come from?"  They said,
"From the land of Canaan to buy food."
Joseph recognized his brothers, but they didn't recognize him.
Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed about them,
and said to them, "You are spies!  You have come to see
the nakedness of the land."
They said to him, "No, my lord, but your servants have come
to buy food.
We are all one man's sons; we are honest men.  Your servants
are not spies."
He said to them, "No, but you have come to see the nakedness
of the land."
They said, "We, your servants, are twelve brothers, the sons
of one man in the land of Canaan; and behold, the youngest
is this day with our father, and one is no more."
Joseph said to them, "It is like I told you, saying, 'You are spies.'
By this you shall be tested.  By the life of Pharaoh,
you shall not go forth from here, unless your youngest
brother comes here.
Send one of you, and let him get your brother, and you shall be bound,
that your words may be tested, whether there is truth in you,
or else by the life of Pharaoh surely you are spies."
He put them all together into custody for three days.
Joseph said to them the third day, "Do this, and live,
for I fear God.
If you are honest men, then let one of your brothers be bound
in your prison; but you go, carry grain for the famine
of your houses.
Bring your youngest brother to me; so will your words be verified,
and you won't die."  They did so.
They said one to another, "We are certainly guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the distress of his soul,
when he begged us, and we wouldn't listen.  Therefore this
distress has come upon us."
Reuben answered them, saying, "Didn't I tell you, saying,
'Don't sin against the child,' and you wouldn't listen?
Therefore also, behold, his blood is required."
They didn't know that Joseph understood them; for there was
an interpreter between them.
He turned himself away from them, and wept.  Then he returned
to them, and spoke to them, and took Simeon from among them,
and bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph gave a command to fill their bags with grain,
and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give
them food for the way.  So it was done to them.
They loaded their donkeys with their grain, and departed from there.
As one of them opened his sack to give his donkey food in the
lodging place, he saw his money.  Behold, it was in the mouth
of his sack.
He said to his brothers, "My money is restored!  Behold, it is
in my sack!"  Their hearts failed them, and they turned
trembling one to another, saying, "What is this that God has
done to us?"
They came to Jacob their father, to the land of Canaan,
and told him all that had happened to them, saying,
"The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us,
and took us for spies of the country.
We said to him, 'We are honest men.  We are no spies.
We are twelve brothers, sons of our father; one is no more,
and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.'
The man, the lord of the land, said to us, 'By this I will know
that you are honest men:  leave one of your brothers with me,
and take grain for the famine of your houses, and go your way.
Bring your youngest brother to me.  Then I will know
that you are not spies, but that you are honest men.
So I will deliver your brother to you, and you shall trade
in the land.'"
It happened as they emptied their sacks, that behold, every man's
bundle of money was in his sack.  When they and their father
saw their bundles of money, they were afraid.
Jacob, their father, said to them, "You have bereaved me
of my children!  Joseph is no more, Simeon is no more,
and you want to take Benjamin away.  All these things
are against me."
Reuben spoke to his father, saying, "Kill my two sons,
if I don't bring him to you.  Entrust him to my care,
and I will bring him to you again."
He said, "My son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he only is left.  If harm happens to him along
the way in which you go, then you will bring down my gray
hairs with sorrow to Sheol."
The famine was severe in the land.
It happened, when they had eaten up the grain which they had
brought out of Egypt, their father said to them, "Go again,
buy us a little more food."
Judah spoke to him, saying, "The man solemnly warned us, saying,
'You shall not see my face, unless your brother is with you.'
If you'll send our brother with us, we'll go down and buy you food,
but if you'll not send him, we'll not go down, for the man
said to us, 'You shall not see my face, unless your brother
is with you.'"
Israel said, "Why did you treat me so badly, telling the man
that you had another brother?"
They said, "The man asked directly concerning ourselves,
and concerning our relatives, saying, 'Is your father still alive?
Have you another brother?'  We just answered his questions.
Is there any way we could know that he would say,
'Bring your brother down?'"
Judah said to Israel, his father, "Send the boy with me,
and we'll get up and go, so that we may live, and not die,
both we, and you, and also our little ones.
I'll be collateral for him.  From my hand will you require him.
If I don't bring him to you, and set him before you,
then let me bear the blame forever,
for if we hadn't delayed, surely we would have returned a second
time by now."
Their father, Israel, said to them, "If it must be so, then do this.
Take from the choice fruits of the land in your bags, and carry
down a present for the man, a little balm, a little honey,
spices and myrrh, nuts, and almonds;
and take double money in your hand, and take back
the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks.
Perhaps it was an oversight.
Take your brother also, get up, and return to the man.
May God Almighty give you mercy before the man,
that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin.
If I am bereaved of my children, I am bereaved."
The men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand, and Benjamin; and got up, went down to Egypt,
and stood before Joseph.
When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of
his house, "Bring the men into the house, and butcher an animal,
and make ready; for the men will dine with me at noon."
The man did as Joseph commanded, and the man brought the men
to Joseph's house.
The men were afraid, because they were brought to Joseph's house;
and they said, "Because of the money that was returned in our
sacks at the first time, we're brought in; that he may seek
occasion against us, attack us, and seize us as slaves,
along with our donkeys."
They came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they
spoke to him at the door of the house,
and said, "Oh, my lord, we indeed came down the first time
to buy food.
When we came to the lodging place, we opened our sacks,
and behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack,
our money in full weight.  We have brought it back in our hand.
We have brought down other money in our hand to buy food.
We don't know who put our money in our sacks."
He said, "Peace be to you.  Don't be afraid.  Your God,
and the God of your father, has given you treasure in your sacks.
I received your money."  He brought Simeon out to them.
The man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water,
and they washed their feet.  He gave their donkeys fodder.
They made ready the present for Joseph's coming at noon,
for they heard that they should eat bread there.
When Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was
in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves down to him
to the earth.
He asked them of their welfare, and said, "Is your father well,
the old man of whom you spoke?  Is he yet alive?"
They said, "Your servant, our father, is well.  He is still alive."
They bowed the head, and did homage.
He lifted up his eyes, and saw Benjamin, his brother,
his mother's son, and said, "Is this your youngest brother,
of whom you spoke to me?"  He said, "God be gracious
to you, my son."
Joseph hurried, for his heart yearned over his brother;
and he sought a place to weep.  He entered into his room,
and wept there.
He washed his face, and came out.  He controlled himself,
and said, "Serve the meal."
They served him by himself, and them by themselves,
and the Egyptians, that ate with him, by themselves,
because the Egyptians don't eat bread with the Hebrews,
for that is an abomination to the Egyptians.
They sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
and the youngest according to his youth, and the men marveled
one with another.
He sent portions to them from before him, but Benjamin's
portion was five times as much as any of theirs.
They drank, and were merry with him.
He commanded the steward of his house, saying, "Fill the men's
sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every
man's money in his sack's mouth.
Put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest,
with his grain money."  He did according to the word that
Joseph had spoken.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away,
they and their donkeys.
When they had gone out of the city, and were not yet far off,
Joseph said to his steward, "Up, follow after the men.
When you overtake them, ask them, 'Why have you rewarded
evil for good?
Isn't this that from which my lord drinks, and by which
he indeed divines?  You have done evil in so doing.'"
He overtook them, and he spoke these words to them.
They said to him, "Why does my lord speak such words as these?
Far be it from your servants that they should do such a thing!
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
again to you out of the land of Canaan.  How then should we
steal silver or gold out of your lord's house?
With whoever of your servants it be found, let him die,
and we also will be my lord's bondservants."
He said, "Now also let it be according to your words:
he with whom it is found will be my bondservant; and you
will be blameless."
Then they hurried, and every man took his sack down to the ground,
and every man opened his sack.
He searched, beginning with the eldest, and ending at the youngest.
The cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they tore their clothes, and every man loaded his donkey,
and returned to the city.
Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house, and he was
still there.  They fell on the ground before him.
Joseph said to them, "What deed is this that you have done?
Don't you know that such a man as I can indeed divine?"
Judah said, "What will we tell my lord?  What will we speak?
Or how will we clear ourselves?  God has found out the iniquity
of your servants.  Behold, we are my lord's bondservants,
both we, and he also in whose hand the cup is found."
He said, "Far be it from me that I should do so.  The man
in whose hand the cup is found, he will be my bondservant;
but as for you, go up in peace to your father."
Then Judah came near to him, and said, "Oh, my lord,
please let your servant speak a word in my lord's ears,
and don't let your anger burn against your servant;
for you are even as Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, 'Have you a father,
or a brother?'
We said to my lord, 'We have a father, an old man, and a child
of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead,
and he alone is left of his mother; and his father loves him.'
You said to your servants, 'Bring him down to me, that I may
set my eyes on him.'
We said to my lord, 'The boy can't leave his father:
for if he should leave his father, his father would die.'
You said to your servants, 'Unless your youngest brother comes
down with you, you will see my face no more.'
It happened when we came up to your servant my father,
we told him the words of my lord.
Our father said, 'Go again, buy us a little food.'
We said, 'We can't go down.  If our youngest brother is with us,
then we will go down:  for we may not see the man's face,
unless our youngest brother is with us.'
Your servant, my father, said to us, 'You know that my wife
bore me two sons:
and the one went out from me, and I said, "Surely he is torn
in pieces;" and I haven't seen him since.
If you take this one also from me, and harm happens to him,
you will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.'
Now therefore when I come to your servant my father,
and the boy is not with us; seeing that his life is bound up
in the boy's life;
it will happen, when he sees that the boy is no more,
that he will die.  Your servants will bring down the gray
hairs of your servant, our father, with sorrow to Sheol.
For your servant became collateral for the boy to my father,
saying, 'If I don't bring him to you, then I will bear
the blame to my father forever.'
Now therefore, please let your servant stay instead of the boy,
a bondservant to my lord; and let the boy go up with his brothers.
For how will I go up to my father, if the boy isn't with me?--
lest I see the evil that will come on my father."
Then Joseph couldn't control himself before all those who stood
before him, and he cried, "Cause every man to go out from me!"
No one else stood with him, while Joseph made himself known
to his brothers.
He wept aloud.  The Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard.
Joseph said to his brothers, "I am Joseph!  Does my father
still live?"  His brothers couldn't answer him; for they
were terrified at his presence.
Joseph said to his brothers, "Come near to me, please."
They came near.  "He said, I am Joseph, your brother,
whom you sold into Egypt.
Now don't be grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that you sold
me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
For these two years the famine has been in the land,
and there are yet five years, in which there will be neither
plowing nor harvest.
God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant in the earth,
and to save you alive by a great deliverance.
So now it wasn't you who sent me here, but God, and he has
made me a father to Pharaoh, lord of all his house, and ruler
over all the land of Egypt.
Hurry, and go up to my father, and tell him, 'This is what
your son Joseph says, "God has made me lord of all Egypt.
Come down to me.  Don't wait.
You shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and you will be near
to me, you, your children, your children's children, your flocks,
your herds, and all that you have.
There I will nourish you; for there are yet five years of famine;
lest you come to poverty, you, and your household, and all
that you have."'
Behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin,
that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
You shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt,
and of all that you have seen.  You shall hurry and bring
my father down here."
He fell on his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept, and Benjamin
wept on his neck.
He kissed all his brothers, and wept on them.  After that his
brothers talked with him.
The report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
"Joseph's brothers have come."  It pleased Pharaoh well,
and his servants.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Tell your brothers, 'Do this.
Load your animals, and go, travel to the land of Canaan.
Take your father and your households, and come to me,
and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and you
will eat the fat of the land.'
Now you are commanded:  do this.  Take wagons out of the land
of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring
your father, and come.
Also, don't concern yourselves about your belongings,
for the good of all of the land of Egypt is yours."
The sons of Israel did so.  Joseph gave them wagons,
according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them
provision for the way.
He gave each one of them changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave
three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of clothing.
To his father, he sent after this manner:  ten donkeys loaded
with the good things of Egypt, and ten female donkeys loaded
with grain and bread and provision for his father by the way.
So he sent his brothers away, and they departed.
He said to them, "See that you don't quarrel on the way."
They went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan,
to Jacob their father.
They told him, saying, "Joseph is still alive, and he is
ruler over all the land of Egypt."  His heart fainted,
for he didn't believe them.
They told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them.
When he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him,
the spirit of Jacob, their father, revived.
Israel said, "It is enough.  Joseph my son is still alive.
I will go and see him before I die."
Israel traveled with all that he had, and came to Beersheba,
and offered sacrifices to the God of his father, Isaac.
God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night, and said,
"Jacob, Jacob!"  He said, "Here I am."
He said, "I am God, the God of your father.  Don't be afraid to go
down into Egypt, for there I will make of you a great nation.
I will go down with you into Egypt.  I will also surely bring
you up again.  Joseph will close your eyes."
Jacob rose up from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob,
their father, their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons
which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
They took their livestock, and their goods, which they had gotten
in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt--Jacob, and all
his seed with him,
his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters,
and his sons' daughters, and he brought all his seed with
him into Egypt.
These are the names of the children of Israel, who came
into Egypt, Jacob and his sons:  Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
The sons of Reuben:  Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
The sons of Simeon:  Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul
the son of a Canaanite woman.
The sons of Levi:  Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
The sons of Judah:  Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah;
but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.  The sons of Perez
were Hezron and Hamul.
The sons of Issachar:  Tola, Puvah, Iob, and Shimron.
The sons of Zebulun:  Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.
These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan Aram,
with his daughter Dinah.  All the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty-three.
The sons of Gad:  Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi,
and Areli.
The sons of Asher:  Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah
their sister.  The sons of Beriah:  Heber and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah,
his daughter, and these she bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife:  Joseph and Benjamin.
To Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim,
whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On,
bore to him.
The sons of Benjamin:  Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman,
Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob:
all the souls were fourteen.
The son of Dan:  Hushim.
The sons of Naphtali:  Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter,
and these she bore to Jacob:  all the souls were seven.
All the souls who came with Jacob into Egypt, who were his
direct descendants, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the
souls were sixty-six.
The sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two souls.
All the souls of the house of Jacob, who came into Egypt,
were seventy.
He sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show the way before him
to Goshen, and they came into the land of Goshen.
Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel,
his father, in Goshen.  He presented himself to him,
and fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
Israel said to Joseph, "Now let me die, since I have seen
your face, that you are still alive."
Joseph said to his brothers, and to his father's house,
"I will go up, and speak with Pharaoh, and will tell him,
'My brothers, and my father's house, who were in the land
of Canaan, have come to me.
These men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of livestock,
and they have brought their flocks, and their herds,
and all that they have.'
It will happen, when Pharaoh summons you, and will say,
'What is your occupation?'
that you shall say, 'Your servants have been keepers of livestock
from our youth even until now, both we, and our fathers:'
that you may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd
is an abomination to the Egyptians."
Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, and said, "My father
and my brothers, with their flocks, their herds, and all that
they own, have come out of the land of Canaan; and behold,
they are in the land of Goshen."
From among his brothers he took five men, and presented
them to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to his brothers, "What is your occupation?"
They said to Pharaoh, "Your servants are shepherds, both we,
and our fathers."
They said to Pharaoh, "We have come to live as foreigners in
the land, for there is no pasture for your servants' flocks.
For the famine is severe in the land of Canaan.  Now therefore,
please let your servants dwell in the land of Goshen."
Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, "Your father and your brothers
have come to you.
The land of Egypt is before you.  Make your father and your
brothers dwell in the best of the land.  Let them dwell
in the land of Goshen.  If you know any able men among them,
then put them in charge of my livestock."
Joseph brought in Jacob, his father, and set him before Pharaoh,
and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to Jacob, "How many are the days of the years
of your life?"
Jacob said to Pharaoh, "The days of the years of my pilgrimage
are one hundred thirty years.  Few and evil have been
the days of the years of my life, and they have not attained
to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days
of their pilgrimage."
Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
Joseph placed his father and his brothers, and gave them
a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land,
in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
Joseph nourished his father, his brothers, and all of his
father's household, with bread, according to their families.
There was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very severe,
so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan fainted
by reason of the famine.
Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt,
and in the land of Canaan, for the grain which they bought:
and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
When the money was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in
the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said,
"Give us bread, for why should we die in your presence?
For our money fails."
Joseph said, "Give me your livestock; and I will give you food
for your livestock, if your money is gone."
They brought their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph gave
them bread in exchange for the horses, and for the flocks,
and for the herds, and for the donkeys:  and he fed them
with bread in exchange for all their livestock for that year.
When that year was ended, they came to him the second year,
and said to him, "We will not hide from my lord how our money
is all spent, and the herds of livestock are my lord's. There
is nothing left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies,
and our lands.
Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land?
Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will
be servants to Pharaoh.  Give us seed, that we may live,
and not die, and that the land won't be desolate."
So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh,
for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine
was severe on them, and the land became Pharaoh's.
As for the people, he moved them to the cities from one end
of the border of Egypt even to the other end of it.
Only he didn't buy the land of the priests, for the priests had a
portion from Pharaoh, and ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them.
That is why they didn't sell their land.
Then Joseph said to the people, "Behold, I have bought you
and your land today for Pharaoh.  Behold, here is seed for you,
and you shall sow the land.
It will happen at the harvests, that you shall give a fifth
to Pharaoh, and four parts will be your own, for seed
of the field, for your food, for them of your households,
and for food for your little ones."
They said, "You have saved our lives!  Let us find favor
in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants."
Joseph made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt
to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth.
Only the land of the priests alone didn't become Pharaoh's.
Israel lived in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen;
and they got themselves possessions therein, and were fruitful,
and multiplied exceedingly.
Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years.
So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were one
hundred forty-seven years.
The time drew near that Israel must die, and he called his son Joseph,
and said to him, "If now I have found favor in your sight, please put
your hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me.
Please don't bury me in Egypt,
but when I sleep with my fathers, you shall carry me
out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place."
He said, "I will do as you have said."
He said, "Swear to me," and he swore to him.  Israel bowed
himself on the bed's head.
It happened after these things, that someone said to Joseph, "Behold,
your father is sick."  He took with him his two sons,
Manasseh and Ephraim.
Someone told Jacob, and said, "Behold, your son Joseph comes to you,"
and Israel strengthened himself, and sat on the bed.
Jacob said to Joseph, "God Almighty appeared to me at Luz
in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
and said to me, 'Behold, I will make you fruitful, and multiply you,
and I will make of you a company of peoples, and will give this
land to your seed after you for an everlasting possession.'
Now your two sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt
before I came to you into Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh,
even as Reuben and Simeon, will be mine.
Your issue, who you become the father of after them, will be yours.
They will be called after the name of their brothers
in their inheritance.
As for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel died by me in the land
of Canaan in the way, when there was still some distance to come
to Ephrath, and I buried her there in the way to Ephrath
(the same is Bethlehem)."
Israel saw Joseph's sons, and said, "Who are these?"
Joseph said to his father, "They are my sons, whom God
has given me here."  He said, "Please bring them to me,
and I will bless them."
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he couldn't see.
He brought them near to him; and he kissed them,
and embraced them.
Israel said to Joseph, "I didn't think I would see your face,
and behold, God has let me see your seed also."
Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
himself with his face to the earth.
Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's
left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's
right hand, and brought them near to him.
Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on Ephraim's head,
who was the younger, and his left hand on Manasseh's head,
guiding his hands knowingly, for Manasseh was the firstborn.
He blessed Joseph, and said, "The God before whom my fathers
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God who has fed me all my life
long to this day,
the angel who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads,
and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac.  Let them grow into a multitude in the midst
of the earth."
When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on the head
of Ephraim, it displeased him.  He held up his father's hand,
to remove it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head.
Joseph said to his father, "Not so, my father; for this is
the firstborn; put your right hand on his head."
His father refused, and said, "I know, my son, I know.
He also will become a people, and he also will be great.
However, his younger brother will be greater than he,
and his seed will become a multitude of nations."
He blessed them that day, saying, "In you will Israel bless,
saying, 'God make you as Ephraim and as Manasseh'" He set
Ephraim before Manasseh.
Israel said to Joseph, "Behold, I am dying, but God will be
with you, and bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover I have given to you one portion above your brothers,
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword
and with my bow."
Jacob called to his sons, and said:  "Gather yourselves together,
that I may tell you that which will happen to you in the
days to come.
Assemble yourselves, and hear, you sons of Jacob.
Listen to Israel, your father.
"Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning
of my strength; excelling in dignity, and excelling in power.
Boiling over as water, you shall not excel; because you
went up to your father's bed, then defiled it.
He went up to my couch.
"Simeon and Levi are brothers.  Their swords are weapons of violence.
My soul, don't come into their council.  My glory, don't be
united to their assembly; for in their anger they killed men.
In their self-will they hamstrung oxen.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel.  I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter
them in Israel.
"Judah, your brothers will praise you.  Your hand will be
on the neck of your enemies.  Your father's sons will bow
down before you.
Judah is a lion's cub.  From the prey, my son, you have gone up.
He stooped down, he crouched as a lion, as a lioness.
Who will rouse him up?
The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff
from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs.
To him will the obedience of the peoples be.
Binding his foal to the vine, his donkey's colt to the choice vine;
he has washed his garments in wine, his robes in the
blood of grapes.
His eyes will be red with wine, his teeth white with milk.
"Zebulun will dwell at the haven of the sea.  He will be for
a haven of ships.  His border will be on Sidon.
"Issachar is a strong donkey, lying down between the saddlebags.
He saw a resting place, that it was good, the land,
that it was pleasant.  He bows his shoulder to the burden,
and becomes a servant doing forced labor.
"Dan will judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan will be a serpent in the way, an adder in the path,
That bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward.
I have waited for your salvation, Yahweh.
"A troop will press on Gad, but he will press on their heel.
"Asher's food will be rich.  He will yield royal dainties.
"Naphtali is a doe set free, who bears beautiful fawns.
"Joseph is a fruitful vine, a fruitful vine by a spring.
His branches run over the wall.
The archers have sorely grieved him, shot at him,
and persecute him:
But his bow remained strong.  The arms of his hands were
made strong, by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob,
(from there is the shepherd, the stone of Israel),
even by the God of your father, who will help you; by the Almighty,
who will bless you, with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lies below, blessings of the breasts,
and of the womb.
The blessings of your father have prevailed above the blessings
of your ancestors, above the boundaries of the ancient hills.
They will be on the head of Joseph, on the crown of the head
of him who is separated from his brothers.
"Benjamin is a ravenous wolf.  In the morning he will devour
the prey.  At evening he will divide the spoil."
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this
is what their father spoke to them and blessed them.
He blessed everyone according to his blessing.
He charged them, and said to them, "I am to be gathered to my people.
Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field
of Ephron the Hittite,
in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre,
in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field
from Ephron the Hittite as a burial place.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah, his wife.  There they
buried Isaac and Rebekah, his wife, and there I buried Leah:
the field and the cave that is therein, which was purchased
from the children of Heth."
When Jacob made an end of charging his sons, he gathered
up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the spirit,
and was gathered to his people.
Joseph fell on his father's face, wept on him, and kissed him.
Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father;
and the physicians embalmed Israel.
Forty days were fulfilled for him, for that is how many
the days it takes to embalm.  The Egyptians wept for him
for seventy days.
When the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke
to the house of Pharaoh, saying, "If now I have found favor
in your eyes, please speak in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
'My father made me swear, saying, "Behold, I am dying.  Bury me
in my grave which I have dug for myself in the land of Canaan."
Now therefore, please let me go up and bury my father,
and I will come again.'"
Pharaoh said, "Go up, and bury your father, just like he
made you swear."
Joseph went up to bury his father; and with him went up
all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house,
all the elders of the land of Egypt,
all the house of Joseph, his brothers, and his father's house.
Only their little ones, their flocks, and their herds,
they left in the land of Goshen.
There went up with him both chariots and horsemen.
It was a very great company.
They came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan,
and there they lamented with a very great and sore lamentation.
He mourned for his father seven days.
When the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning
in the floor of Atad, they said, "This is a grievous mourning
by the Egyptians."  Therefore, the name of it was called
Abel Mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
His sons did to him just as he commanded them,
for his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried
him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham
bought with the field, for a possession of a burial site,
from Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
Joseph returned into Egypt--he, and his brothers, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had
buried his father.
When Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said,
"It may be that Joseph will hate us, and will fully pay us
back for all of the evil which we did to him."
They sent a message to Joseph, saying, "Your father commanded
before he died, saying,
'You shall tell Joseph, "Now please forgive the disobedience
of your brothers, and their sin, because they did evil to you."'
Now, please forgive the disobedience of the servants of the God
of your father."  Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
His brothers also went and fell down before his face;
and they said, "Behold, we are your servants."
Joseph said to them, "Don't be afraid, for am I in the place of God?
As for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good,
to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save many people alive.
Now therefore don't be afraid.  I will nourish you and your
little ones."  He comforted them, and spoke kindly to them.
Joseph lived in Egypt, he, and his father's house.
Joseph lived one hundred ten years.
Joseph saw Ephraim's children to the third generation.
The children also of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were born
on Joseph's knees.
Joseph said to his brothers, "I am dying, but God will surely
visit you, and bring you up out of this land to the land
which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob."
Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, "God will
surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones from here."
So Joseph died, being one hundred ten years old, and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
Alussa Jumala loi taivaan ja maan. 
Maa oli
autio ja tyhjä, pimeys peitti syvyydet, ja Jumalan
henki liikkui vetten yllä.
Jumala sanoi: "Tulkoon valo!" Ja valo tuli.
Jumala näki, että valo oli hyvä. Jumala erotti
valon pimeydestä, 
ja hän nimitti valon päiväksi,
ja pimeyden hän nimitti yöksi. Tuli ilta ja tuli
aamu, näin meni ensimmäinen päivä.
Jumala sanoi: "Tulkoon kaartuva kansi vesien
väliin, erottamaan vedet toisistaan." 
Jumala teki
kannen ja erotti toiset vedet sen alapuolelle ja
toiset sen yläpuolelle. Niin tapahtui, 
ja Jumala
nimitti kannen taivaaksi. Tuli ilta ja tuli aamu,
näin meni toinen päivä.
Jumala sanoi: "Kokoontukoot taivaankannen
alapuolella olevat vedet yhteen paikkaan, niin että
maan kamara tulee näkyviin." Ja niin tapahtui.
Jumala nimitti kiinteän kamaran maaksi, ja sen
paikan, mihin vedet olivat kokoontuneet, hän nimitti
mereksi. Ja Jumala näki, että niin oli hyvä.
Jumala sanoi: "Kasvakoon maa vihreyttä, siementä
tekeviä kasveja ja hedelmäpuita, jotka maan päällä
kantavat hedelmissään kukin lajinsa mukaista
siementä." Ja niin tapahtui. 
Maa versoi
vihreyttä, siementä tekeviä kasveja ja hedelmäpuita,
jotka kantoivat hedelmissään kukin oman lajinsa
mukaista siementä. Jumala näki, että niin oli hyvä.
Tuli ilta ja tuli aamu, näin meni kolmas päivä.
Jumala sanoi: "Tulkoon valoja taivaankanteen
erottamaan päivän yöstä, ja olkoot ne merkkeinä
osoittamassa määräaikoja, hetkiä ja vuosia. 
Ne
loistakoot taivaankannesta ja antakoot valoa maan
päälle." Ja niin tapahtui. 
Jumala teki kaksi
suurta valoa, suuremman hallitsemaan päivää ja
pienemmän hallitsemaan yötä, sekä tähdet. 
Hän
asetti ne taivaankanteen loistamaan maan päälle,
hallitsemaan päivää ja yötä ja erottamaan valon
pimeydestä. Jumala näki, että niin oli hyvä.
Tuli ilta ja tuli aamu, näin meni neljäs päivä.
Jumala sanoi: "Viliskööt vedet eläviä olentoja
ja lennelkööt linnut ilmassa taivaankannen alla."
Niin Jumala loi suuret meripedot ja kaikki muut
elävät olennot, joita vedet vilisevät, sekä kaikki
siivekkäiden lajit. Jumala näki, että niin oli hyvä.
Hän siunasi ne sanoen: "Olkaa hedelmälliset ja
lisääntykää ja täyttäkää meren vedet, ja linnut
lisääntykööt maan päällä." 
Tuli ilta ja tuli
aamu, näin meni viides päivä.
Jumala sanoi: "Tuottakoon maa kaikenlaisia
eläviä olentoja, kaikki karjaeläinten, pikkueläinten
ja villieläinten lajit." Ja niin tapahtui.
Jumala teki villieläimet, karjaeläimet ja
erilaiset pikkueläimet, kaikki eläinten lajit. Ja
Jumala näki, että niin oli hyvä.
Jumala sanoi: "Tehkäämme ihminen, tehkäämme
hänet kuvaksemme, kaltaiseksemme, ja hallitkoon hän
meren kaloja, taivaan lintuja, karjaeläimiä, maata
ja kaikkia pikkueläimiä, joita maan päällä liikkuu."
Ja Jumala loi ihmisen kuvakseen, Jumalan kuvaksi
hän hänet loi, mieheksi ja naiseksi hän loi heidät.
Jumala siunasi heidät ja sanoi heille: "Olkaa
hedelmälliset, lisääntykää ja täyttäkää maa ja
ottakaa se valtaanne. Vallitkaa meren kaloja,
taivaan lintuja ja kaikkea, mikä maan päällä elää ja
liikkuu." 
Jumala sanoi vielä: "Minä annan teille
kaikki siementä tekevät kasvit, joita maan päällä
on, ja kaikki puut, joissa on siementä kantavat
hedelmät. Olkoot ne teidän ravintonanne. 
Ja
villieläimille ja taivaan linnuille ja kaikelle,
mikä maan päällä elää ja liikkuu, minä annan
ravinnoksi vihreät kasvit." Niin tapahtui. 
Ja
Jumala katsoi kaikkea tekemäänsä, ja kaikki oli
hyvää. Tuli ilta ja tuli aamu, näin meni kuudes
päivä.
Näin tulivat valmiiksi taivas ja maa ja kaikki
mitä niissä on. 
Jumala oli saanut työnsä
päätökseen, ja seitsemäntenä päivänä hän lepäsi
kaikesta työstään. 
Ja Jumala siunasi seitsemännen
päivän ja pyhitti sen, koska hän sinä päivänä lepäsi
kaikesta luomistyöstään. 
Tämä on kertomus siitä,
kuinka taivas ja maa saivat alkunsa silloin kun ne
luotiin.
Siihen aikaan, kun Herra Jumala teki maan ja
taivaan, 
ei maan päällä ollut vielä yhtään
pensasta eikä edes ruoho ollut noussut esiin, sillä
Herra Jumala ei ollut antanut sateen kastella maata
eikä ihmistä vielä ollut maata viljelemässä.
Mutta maasta kumpusi vettä, ja se kasteli maan
pinnan. 
Ja Herra Jumala muovasi maan tomusta
ihmisen ja puhalsi hänen sieraimiinsa elämän
henkäyksen. Näin ihmisestä tuli elävä olento.
Herra Jumala istutti puutarhan itään, Eedeniin,
ja sinne hän asetti ihmisen, jonka oli tehnyt.
Herra Jumala kasvatti maasta esiin kaikenlaisia
puita, jotka olivat kauniita katsella ja joiden
hedelmät olivat hyviä syödä, ja paratiisin keskelle
hän kasvatti elämän puun sekä hyvänja pahantiedon
puun.
Eedenistä sai alkunsa joki, joka kasteli
puutarhan ja joka sieltä lähtiessään jakautui
neljäksi haaraksi. 
Ensimmäisen nimi on Pison. Se
kiertää koko Havilan maan, missä on kultaa, 
ja
sen maan kulta on hyvää. Siellä on myös
suitsutuspihkaa ja onykskiveä. 
Toisen joen nimi
on Gihon. Se kiertää koko Nubian maan. 
Kolmannen
joen nimi on Tigris, ja se virtaa Assurin editse. Ja
neljäs joki on Eufrat.
Herra Jumala asetti ihmisen Eedenin puutarhaan
viljelemään ja varjelemaan sitä. 
Herra Jumala
sanoi ihmiselle: "Saat vapaasti syödä puutarhan
kaikista puista. 
Vain siitä puusta, joka antaa
tiedon hyvästä ja pahasta, älä syö, sillä sinä
päivänä, jona siitä syöt, olet kuoleman oma."
Herra Jumala sanoi: "Ei ole hyvä ihmisen olla
yksinään. Minä teen hänelle kumppanin, joka sopii
hänen avukseen." 
Ja Herra Jumala muovasi maasta
kaikki villieläimet ja kaikki taivaan linnut ja vei
ne ihmisen luo nähdäkseen, minkä nimen hän kullekin
antaisi. Ja jokainen elävä olento sai sen nimen,
jolla ihminen sitä kutsui. 
Näin ihminen antoi
nimet kaikille karjaeläimille, kaikille linnuille ja
kaikille villieläimille. Mutta ihmiselle ei löytynyt
sopivaa kumppania.
Silloin Herra Jumala vaivutti ihmisen syvään
uneen ja otti hänen nukkuessaan yhden hänen
kylkiluistaan ja täytti kohdan lihalla. 
Herra
Jumala teki tästä kylkiluusta naisen ja toi hänet
miehen luo. 
Ja mies sanoi:
-- Tämä se on! Tämä on
luu minun luustani
ja liha minun lihastani.
Naiseksi häntä sanottakoon:
miehestä hänet on otettu.
Siksi mies jättää isänsä ja äitinsä ja liittyy
vaimoonsa, niin että he tulevat yhdeksi lihaksi.
Ja he olivat molemmat alasti, mies ja hänen
vaimonsa, eivätkä he tunteneet häpeää.
Heprean kielessä maata merkitsevä sana adama ja ihmistä merkitsevä
sana adam ovat äänteellisesti lähellä toisiaan. Ks. myös.
Alkutekstissä on tässä sanaleikki: mies on hepreaksi i , nainen i  a 'miehetär'. 
Käärme oli kavalin kaikista eläimistä, jotka
Herra Jumala oli luonut. Se sanoi naiselle: "Onko
Jumala todella sanonut: 'Te ette saa syödä mistään
puutarhan puusta'?" 
Nainen vastasi käärmeelle:
"Kyllä me saamme syödä puutarhan puiden hedelmiä.
Vain siitä puusta, joka on keskellä paratiisia,
Jumala on sanonut: 'Älkää syökö sen hedelmiä, älkää
edes koskeko niihin, ettette kuolisi.'" 
Silloin
käärme sanoi naiselle: "Ei, ette te kuole. 
Mutta
Jumala tietää, että niin pian kuin te syötte siitä,
teidän silmänne avautuvat ja teistä tulee Jumalan
kaltaisia, niin että tiedätte kaiken, sekä hyvän
että pahan." 
Nainen näki nyt, että puun hedelmät
olivat hyviä syödä ja että se oli kaunis katsella ja
houkutteleva, koska se antoi ymmärrystä. Hän otti
siitä hedelmän ja söi ja antoi myös miehelleen, joka
oli hänen kanssaan, ja mieskin söi.
Silloin heidän silmänsä avautuivat, ja he
huomasivat olevansa alasti. He sitoivat yhteen
viikunanlehtiä ja kietoivat ne vyötärölleen.
Kun iltapäivä viileni, he kuulivat Jumalan
kävelevän puutarhassa. Silloin mies ja nainen
menivät Jumalaa piiloon puutarhan puiden sekaan.
Herra Jumala huusi miestä ja kysyi: "Missä sinä
olet?" 
Mies vastasi: "Minä kuulin sinun
askeleesi puutarhassa. Minua pelotti, koska olen
alasti, ja siksi piilouduin." 
Herra Jumala
kysyi: "Kuka sinulle kertoi, että olet alasti?
Oletko syönyt siitä puusta, josta minä kielsin sinua
syömästä?" 
Mies vastasi: "Nainen, jonka sinä
annoit minulle kumppaniksi, antoi minulle sen puun
hedelmän, ja minä söin." 
Silloin Herra Jumala
sanoi naiselle: "Mitä oletkaan tehnyt!" Nainen
vastasi: "Käärme minut petti, ja minä söin."
Herra Jumala sanoi käärmeelle:
-- Koska tämän teit, olet kirottu.
Toisin kuin muut eläimet,
karja ja pedot,
sinun on madeltava vatsallasi
ja syötävä maan tomua
niin kauan kuin elät.
Ja minä panen vihan sinun ja naisen välille
ja sinun sukusi ja hänen sukunsa välille:
ihminen on iskevä sinun pääsi murskaksi,
ja sinä olet iskevä häntä kantapäähän.
Naiselle hän sanoi:
-- Minä teen suuriksi sinun raskautesi vaivat,
ja kivulla sinä olet synnyttävä lapsesi.
Kuitenkin tunnet halua mieheesi,
ja hän pitää sinua vallassaan.
Ja miehelle hän sanoi:
-- Koska teit niin kuin vaimosi sanoi
ja söit puusta, josta minä kielsin sinua syömästä,
niin olkoon maa sinun takiasi kirottu.
Kovalla työllä sinun on hankittava siitä elantosi
niin kauan kuin elät.
Maa kasvaa sinulle
orjantappuraa ja ohdaketta,
mutta sen kasveista joudut ottamaan ravintosi.
Otsa hiessä sinun on hankittava leipäsi,
kunnes tulet maaksi jälleen,
sillä siitä sinut on otettu.
Maan tomua sinä olet,
maan tomuun sinä palaat.
Mies antoi vaimolleen nimeksi Eeva, sillä
hänestä tuli kaikkien ihmisten kantaäiti.
Ja
Herra Jumala teki Aadamille
ja hänen vaimolleen
nahasta vaatteet ja puki heidät niihin.
Sitten Herra Jumala sanoi: "Ihminen on nyt kuin
me: hän tietää sekä hyvän että pahan. Ettei hän nyt
vain ota elämän puusta hedelmää ja syö ja niin elä
ikuisesti!" 
Niin Herra Jumala ajoi ihmisen pois
Eedenin puutarhasta ja pani hänet viljelemään maata,
josta hänet oli tehty. 
Hän karkotti ihmisen ja
asetti Eedenin puutarhan itäpuolelle kerubit ja
salamoivan, leimuavan miekan vartioimaan elämän
puulle vievää tietä.
Sananmukaisesti: sinun siemenesi ja hänen siemenensä
välille. 
Nimi Eeva, hepreaksi Hawwa, muistuttaa verbiä
haja 'elää'. Sananmukainen käännös »kaikkien elävien
äiti». 
Kaikkialla ei ole ratkaistavissa, onko adam-sanaa käytetty erisnimenä
vai tarkoittaako se ihmistä yleensä.
Mies yhtyi vaimoonsa Eevaan, ja Eeva tuli
raskaaksi ja synnytti Kainin. Eeva sanoi: "Minä olen
Herran avulla saanut poikalapsen."
Sitten hän
synnytti Kainille veljen, Abelin. Abelista tuli
lammaspaimen ja Kainista maanviljelijä.
Kerran Kain toi Herralle uhrilahjaksi maan satoa,
ja Abel toi lampaidensa esikoiskaritsoja ja
niiden rasvaa. Herra katsoi suopeasti Abeliin ja
hänen uhriinsa, 
mutta Kainin ja hänen uhrinsa
puoleen hän ei katsonut. Silloin Kain suuttui kovin
ja hänen katseensa synkistyi. 
Herra kysyi
Kainilta: "Miksi sinä suutuit ja katselet synkkänä
maahan? 
Jos teet oikein, voit kohottaa katseesi,
mutta jos et tee, on synti ovella vaanimassa. Sinua
se haluaa, mutta sinun on pidettävä se kurissa."
Kain sanoi veljelleen Abelille: "Lähde mukaani."
Mutta kun he olivat kulkeneet jonkin matkaa, Kain
kävi veljensä Abelin kimppuun ja tappoi hänet.
Silloin Herra kysyi Kainilta: "Missä on veljesi
Abel?" Kain vastasi: "En tiedä. Olenko minä veljeni
vartija?" 
Herra sanoi: "Mitä oletkaan tehnyt!
Etkö kuule, kuinka veljesi veri huutaa minulle
maasta? 
Nyt olet kirottu etkä voi jäädä tänne,
sillä tämän maan oli avattava suunsa ja otettava
vastaan veljesi veri, jonka sinä vuodatit. 
Kun
koetat viljellä maata, se ei enää ruoki sinua, vaan
sinun on harhailtava kodittomana ja pakolaisena maan
päällä."
Kain sanoi Herralle: "Syntini rangaistus on
minulle liian raskas kantaa. 
Kun sinä nyt
karkotat minut tältä seudulta, minä joudun pois
kasvojesi edestä. Minun on harhailtava kodittomana
ja pakolaisena maailmalla, ja silloin kuka hyvänsä,
joka minut kohtaa, voi tappaa minut." 
Mutta
Herra sanoi hänelle: "Ei, vaan kostettakoon
seitsenkertaisesti sille, joka tappaa Kainin." Ja
Herra pani Kainiin merkin, ettei kukaan, joka hänet
kohtaa, tappaisi häntä. 
Niin Kain lähti pois
Herran kasvojen edestä ja asettui asumaan Nodin
maahan Eedenin itäpuolelle.
Kain yhtyi vaimoonsa, ja tämä tuli raskaaksi ja
synnytti Henokin. Kain oli ensimmäinen, joka perusti
kaupungin, ja hän antoi sille nimen poikansa Henokin
mukaan. 
Henokille syntyi Irad, Iradille syntyi
Mehujael, Mehujaelille syntyi Metusael, ja
Metusaelille syntyi Lemek.
Lemek otti itselleen kaksi vaimoa; toisen nimi
oli Ada ja toisen Silla. 
Ada synnytti Jabalin,
josta tuli teltoissa asuvien paimentolaisten
kantaisä. 
Jabalin veli oli nimeltään Jubal, ja
hänestä tuli ensimmäinen harpunja huilunsoittaja.
Myös Silla synnytti pojan, Tubal-Kainin, sepän, joka aloitti pronssin
ja raudan takomisen. TubalKainilla oli sisar, jonka nimi oli Naama.
Lemek sanoi vaimoilleen:
-- Ada ja Silla, kuulkaa minua,
te Lemekin vaimot, ottakaa korviinne minun sanani!
Jo yhdestä haavasta minä tapan miehen,
jo yhdestä naarmusta nuorukaisen.
Jos Kainin puolesta kostetaan seitsemästi,
niin Lemekin puolesta seitsemänkymmentäseitsemän
kertaa.
Aadam yhtyi taas vaimoonsa, ja tämä synnytti
pojan. Eeva antoi hänelle nimen Set
ja sanoi:
"Jumala on suonut minulle uuden jälkeläisen Abelin
sijaan, jonka Kain tappoi." 
Setillekin syntyi
poika, ja Set antoi hänelle nimen Enos.
Niihin aikoihin alettiin nimeltä kutsuen rukoilla
avuksi Herraa.
Viis. 
Nimi Kain muistuttaa heprean verbiä qana 'saada', 'hankkia'. 
Sana nod merkitsee 'pakolaisuus', vrt. jakeet 12 ja
14. 
Nimi Set muistuttaa heprean verbiä  at 'asettaa', 'suoda'. 
Nimi Enos merkitsee 'ihminen', 'ihmissuku', kuten myös Aadam. 
Tämä on luettelo Aadamin jälkeläisistä.
Luodessaan ihmisen Jumala teki hänet kaltaisekseen.
Hän loi ihmisen mieheksi ja naiseksi. Ja hän
siunasi heidät ja antoi heille nimeksi ihminen
silloin kun heidät luotiin.
Kun Aadam oli elänyt 130 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
poika, joka oli hänen näköisensä, hänen kaltaisensa,
ja hän antoi pojalle nimen Set. 
Setin syntymän
jälkeen Aadam eli vielä 800 vuotta, ja hänelle
syntyi sinä aikana lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Aadam eli kaikkiaan 930 vuotta, ja sitten hän
kuoli.
Kun Set oli elänyt 105 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Enos. 
Enosin syntymän jälkeen Set eli vielä 807
vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Set eli kaikkiaan 912 vuotta ja kuoli sitten.
Kun Enos oli elänyt 90 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Kenan. 
Kenanin syntymän jälkeen Enos eli vielä
815 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä. 
Enos eli kaikkiaan 905 vuotta ja kuoli
sitten.
Kun Kenan oli elänyt 70 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Mahalalel. 
Mahalalelin syntymän jälkeen Kenan
eli vielä 840 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia
ja tyttäriä. 
Kenan eli kaikkiaan 910 vuotta ja
kuoli sitten.
Kun Mahalalel oli elänyt 65 vuotta, hänelle
syntyi Jered. 
Jeredin syntymän jälkeen Mahalalel
eli vielä 830 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia
ja tyttäriä. 
Mahalalel eli kaikkiaan 895 vuotta
ja kuoli sitten.
Kun Jered oli elänyt 162 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Henok. 
Henokin syntymän jälkeen Jered eli vielä
800 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä. 
Jered eli kaikkiaan 962 vuotta ja
kuoli sitten.
Kun Henok oli elänyt 65 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Metuselah. 
Metuselahin syntymän jälkeen Henok
eli vielä 300 vuotta vaeltaen aina Jumalan tahdon
mukaisesti, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä. 
Henok eli kaikkiaan 365 vuotta.
Hän vaelsi kuuliaisena Jumalalle. Sitten häntä
ei enää ollut, sillä Jumala otti hänet luokseen.
Kun Metuselah oli elänyt 187 vuotta, hänelle
syntyi Lemek. 
Lemekin syntymän jälkeen Metuselah
eli vielä 782 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia
ja tyttäriä. 
Metuselah eli kaikkiaan 969 vuotta
ja kuoli sitten.
Kun Lemek oli elänyt 182 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
poika. 
Hän antoi pojalle nimen Nooa
ja sanoi:
"Tämä poika on antava meille lohtua työssämme ja
vaivannäössämme, kun viljelemme maata, jonka Herra
on kironnut." 
Lemek eli Nooan syntymän jälkeen
vielä 595 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä. 
Lemek eli kaikkiaan 777 vuotta ja
kuoli sitten.
Kun Nooa oli elänyt 500 vuotta, hänelle
syntyivät Seem, Haam ja Jafet.
Ks. selitystä jakeeseen.
Nimi Nooa (hepreaksi Noah 'lepo') muistuttaa sanaa niham 'lohduttaa', 'keventää mieltä'. 
Kun ihmiset alkoivat lisääntyä maan päällä ja
heille syntyi tyttäriä, 
jumalien pojat
huomasivat, että ihmisten tyttäret olivat kauniita,
ja he ottivat näistä vaimoikseen keitä halusivat.
Herra sanoi: "Minä en anna elämän hengen asua
ihmisessä miten kauan tahansa. Ihminen on lihaa,
heikko ja katoavainen. Olkoon siis hänen elinikänsä
enintään satakaksikymmentä vuotta." 
Siihen aikaan
ja myöhemminkin oli maan päällä jättiläisiä, kun
jumalien pojat yhtyivät ihmisten tyttäriin ja nämä
synnyttivät heille lapsia. Juuri näitä olivat
muinaisajan kuuluisat sankarit.
Kun Herra näki, että ihmisten pahuus lisääntyi
maan päällä ja että heidän ajatuksensa ja pyrkimyksensä olivat kauttaaltaan pahat, 
hän katui, että
oli tehnyt ihmisen, ja murehti sitä sydämessään.
Ja Herra sanoi: "Minä pyyhin maan päältä ihmisen,
jonka olen luonut, ja ihmisen mukana karjaeläimet,
pikkueläimet ja taivaan linnut, sillä minä kadun,
että olen ne tehnyt." 
Mutta Nooa oli Herralle mieluinen.
Tämä on kertomus Nooasta ja hänen suvustaan. Nooa
oli aikalaistensa joukossa ainoa oikeamielinen ja
nuhteeton, ja hän vaelsi Jumalalle kuuliaisena.
Hänelle syntyi kolme poikaa: Seem, Haam ja
Jafet. 
Siihen aikaan turmelus levisi maassa
Jumalan silmien alla ja väkivalta täytti maan.
Kun Jumala katseli maata, hän näki, että
turmelus vallitsi kaikkialla, sillä ihmiset
kuluttivat elämänsä pahuudessa.
Jumala sanoi Nooalle:
"Minä olen päättänyt tehdä lopun kaikesta elollisesta, sillä maa on
ihmisten takia täynnä väkivaltaa.  Minä hävitän heidät ja maan heidän
kanssaan.
Tee
itsellesi arkki sypressipuusta, rakenna se huoneita
täyteen ja tiivistä se maapiellä sisältä ja ulkoa.
Tällaiseksi sinun tulee tehdä arkki: sen pituus
olkoon kolmesataa kyynärää, leveys viisikymmentä ja
korkeus kolmekymmentä kyynärää. 
Rakenna arkkiin
katto ja tee siitä kyynärän verran kalteva, sijoita
ovi arkin kylkeen ja rakenna arkkiin kolme kerrosta.
"Minä lähetän vedenpaisumuksen maan päälle
hävittämään taivaan alta kaiken, missä on elämän
henki. Kaikki on tuhoutuva maan päältä, 
mutta
sinun kanssasi minä teen liiton. Sinun tulee mennä
arkkiin ja ottaa mukaan poikasi, vaimosi ja poikiesi
vaimot. 
Ja kaikkia elollisia sinun tulee ottaa
mukaasi arkkiin kaksi, uros ja naaras, että ne
säilyisivät hengissä sinun kanssasi. 
Lintuja,
karjaeläimiä ja kaikkia pikkueläimiä tulkoon
luoksesi kaksi kutakin lajia, jotta ne jäisivät
henkiin. 
Sinun tulee ottaa mukaan arkkiin
kaikenlaista syötävää, niin että sinulla ja kaikilla
muilla on mitä syödä."
Nooa teki kaiken niin kuin Jumala oli häntä
käskenyt.
Herra sanoi Nooalle: "Mene perheinesi arkkiin,
sillä minä olen havainnut sinut ainoaksi
vanhurskaaksi tämän sukupolven joukossa. 
Ota
kaikkia uhrikelpoisia karjaeläimiä seitsemän paria,
uroksia ja naaraita, mutta kaikkia epäpuhtaita
karjaeläimiä ota kaksi, uros ja naaras. 
Myös
taivaan lintuja ota seitsemän paria, uroksia ja
naaraita, että niiden suku jatkuisi maan päällä.
Seitsemän päivän kuluttua minä lähetän maan
päälle sateen, jota kestää neljäkymmentä päivää ja
neljäkymmentä yötä. Minä pyyhin pois maan päältä
kaikki olennot, jotka olen luonut." 
Nooa teki
niin kuin Herra oli häntä käskenyt.
Nooa oli kuudensadan vuoden ikäinen, kun
vedenpaisumus tuli. 
Hän vei poikansa, vaimonsa ja
poikiensa vaimot mukanaan arkkiin vedenpaisumukselta
turvaan. 
Uhrikelpoisia ja epäpuhtaita karjaeläimiä, lintuja ja kaikkia maalla
liikkuvia pikkueläimiä
meni pareittain, uros ja naaras kutakin
lajia, Nooan luo arkkiin, niin kuin Jumala oli
hänelle sanonut. 
Kun seitsemän päivää oli
kulunut, tuli vedenpaisumus maan päälle.
Sinä vuonna, jona Nooa täytti kuusisataa vuotta,
vuoden toisen kuukauden seitsemäntenätoista päivänä,
puhkesivat kaikki syvyyden lähteet ja taivaan ikkunat aukenivat. 
Maan päällä satoi rankasti neljäkymmentä päivää ja neljäkymmentä yötä. 
Juuri
sinä päivänä Nooa sekä hänen kolme poikaansa Seem,
Haam ja Jafet, hänen vaimonsa ja hänen kolmen poikansa vaimot menivät arkkiin. 
Heidän lisäkseen
arkkiin meni kaikkia villieläimiä, karjaeläimiä ja
maalla liikkuvia pikkueläimiä sekä kaikkia lintuja,
niin pikkulintuja kuin muitakin siivekkäitä.
Nooan luo tuli kaikkia eläviä olentoja
pareittain, 
jokaista lajia uros ja naaras, niin
kuin Jumala oli Nooalle sanonut. Ja Jumala sulki
oven Nooan jälkeen.
Niin tuli vedenpaisumus neljäksikymmeneksi
päiväksi maan päälle. Vedet nousivat ja nostivat
arkin irti, niin että se kohosi korkealle maasta.
Vedet paisuivat ja lisääntyivät suuresti maan
päällä, ja arkki ajelehti veden pinnalla. 
Ja
vedet paisuivat paisumistaan, kunnes korkeimmatkin
vuoret peittyivät. 
Vesi nousi, ja vuoret jäivät
viisitoista kyynärää veden alle. 
Silloin
tuhoutuivat kaikki maan elävät olennot, linnut,
karjaeläimet, villieläimet ja kaikki maan päällä
vilisevät pikkueläimet sekä kaikki ihmiset.
Kaikki kuivalla maalla elävät olennot kuolivat,
kaikki, joissa oli elämän henkäys. 
Näin Herra
pyyhkäisi maan päältä kaikki elävät olennot,
ihmiset, karjaeläimet, pikkueläimet ja linnut;
kaikki ne hän pyyhkäisi pois. Jäljelle jäivät vain
Nooa sekä ne, jotka olivat hänen kanssaan arkissa.
Maa oli veden vallassa sataviisikymmentä päivää.
Mutta Jumala ei unohtanut Nooaa eikä villieläimiä ja karjaeläimiä,
jotka olivat arkissa hänen mukanaan, vaan pani tuulen puhaltamaan maan
yli, ja vedet lakkasivat nousemasta.
Syvyyden lähteet ja
taivaan ikkunat sulkeutuivat, ja sade taukosi.
Vedet väistyivät väistymistään maan päältä, ja
sadanviidenkymmenen päivän kuluttua vedet olivat
alentuneet niin paljon, 
että arkki pysähtyi
seitsemännen kuun seitsemäntenätoista päivänä Araratin vuoristoon. 
Vedet vähenivät vähenemistään
kymmenenteen kuuhun saakka, ja kymmenennen kuun
ensimmäisenä päivänä tulivat vuorten huiput näkyviin.
Kun vielä neljäkymmentä päivää oli kulunut, Nooa
avasi arkin ikkunaluukun, jonka hän oli tehnyt,
ja päästi lentoon korpin. Se lähti ja lenteli
edestakaisin, kunnes vedet olivat kuivuneet maan
päältä. 
Sitten hän lähetti luotaan kyyhkysen
saadakseen tietää, joko maa oli tullut esiin veden
alta, 
mutta se ei löytänyt jalansijaa, mihin
jäädä levähtämään, vaan palasi hänen luokseen
arkkiin, sillä vesi peitti yhä koko maan pinnan. Ja
hän ojensi kätensä ja otti kyyhkysen luokseen
arkkiin. 
Hän odotti vielä seitsemän päivää ja
lähetti kyyhkysen uudelleen arkista. 
Kun
kyyhkynen illansuussa palasi hänen luokseen, sillä
oli nokassaan tuore oliivipuun lehti. Siitä Nooa
ymmärsi, että vedet olivat käyneet vähiin maan
päällä. 
Hän odotti silti seitsemän päivää lisää
ja päästi kyyhkysen jälleen lentoon, eikä se enää
palannut hänen luokseen.
Ensimmäisenä päivänä ensimmäistä kuuta sinä
vuonna, jona Nooa täytti kuusisataayksi vuotta,
vedet eivät enää peittäneet maata. Nooa poisti arkin
katon ja näki, että maan pinta oli kuivunut.
Toisen kuun kahdentenakymmenentenäseitsemäntenä
päivänä maa oli kokonaan kuiva.
Silloin Jumala sanoi Nooalle: 
"Lähde ulos
arkista ja ota mukaan vaimosi, poikasi ja poikiesi
vaimot. 
Vie mukanasi ulos kaikki eläimet, jotka
ovat luonasi, kaikki elävät olennot, linnut,
karjaeläimet ja maan päällä liikkuvat pikkueläimet.
Vilisköön maa niitä jälleen, ja olkoot ne
hedelmälliset ja lisääntykööt maan päällä." 
Niin
Nooa lähti poikiensa, vaimonsa ja poikiensa vaimojen
kanssa ulos, 
ja kaikki eläimet, kaikki
pikkueläimet, linnut ja kaikki maan päällä
liikkuvat, lähtivät suvuittain arkista.
Sitten Nooa rakensi alttarin Herralle, otti
kaikkia uhrikelpoisia karjaeläimiä ja uhrikelpoisia
lintuja ja uhrasi ne polttouhrina alttarilla. 
Ja kun Herra tunsi uhrisavun tuoksun, hän sanoi mielessään: "Minä en
enää koskaan kiroa maata ihmisen tähden, vaikka ihmisen ajatukset ja
teot ovat pahat nuoruudesta saakka, enää en hävitä kaikkea elävää,
niin kuin tein.
-- Niin kauan kuin maa pysyy,
ei lakkaa kylvö eikä korjuu,
ei vilu eikä helle,
ei kesä eikä talvi,
ei päivä eikä yö."
Jumala siunasi Nooan ja hänen poikansa ja sanoi
heille: "Olkaa hedelmälliset ja lisääntykää ja täyttäkää maa. 
Kaikki villieläimet ja taivaan linnut,
kaikki maan päällä liikkuvat eläimet ja meren kalat
pelkäävät ja säikkyvät teitä; ne on annettu teidän
valtaanne. 
Teidän ravintonanne olkoot kaikki
olennot, jotka elävät ja liikkuvat. Ne kaikki minä
annan nyt teille, niin kuin annoin teille vihreät
kasvit. 
Mutta lihaa, jossa vielä on jäljellä sen
elämänvoima, veri, te ette saa syödä. 
Ja
jokaisen, joka vuodattaa teidän verenne, teidän
elämänvoimanne, minä vaadin tilille. Minä vaadin
tilille jokaisen eläimenkin. Vaadin tilille jokaisen
ihmisen, joka vuodattaa lähimmäisensä veren.
-- Joka ihmisen veren vuodattaa,
hänen verensä on ihminen vuodattava,
sillä omaksi kuvakseen
Jumala teki ihmisen.
Olkaa hedelmälliset ja lisääntykää,
lisääntykää ja levitkää yli maan."
Ja Jumala sanoi Nooalle ja hänen pojilleen:
"Minä teen liiton teidän ja teidän jälkeläistenne
kanssa, 
kaikkien elävien olentojen kanssa, jotka
ovat teidän kanssanne maan päällä, lintujen,
karjaeläinten ja kaikkien villieläintenkin kanssa,
kaikkien niiden kanssa, jotka tulivat arkista ulos.
Minä teen liiton ja annan teille lupaukseni:
koskaan enää ei vedenpaisumus tuhoa kaikkea elävää,
se ei koskaan enää hävitä maata."
Jumala sanoi vielä: "Tämä on merkkinä liitosta,
jonka minä teen teidän sekä kaikkien maan päällä
elävien olentojen kanssa kaikkiin tuleviin
sukupolviin asti: 
minä asetan kaareni pilviin,
ja se on oleva merkkinä minun ja maan välisestä
liitosta. 
Kun annan pilvien nousta taivaalle ja
sateenkaari näkyy pilvissä, 
muistan liiton,
jonka olen tehnyt kaikkien elävien olentojen, kaiken
elollisen kanssa: vedet eivät enää koskaan paisu
tuhotulvaksi hukuttamaan kaikkea elävää. 
Kaari
näkyy pilvissä, ja kun minä sen näen, muistan
ikuisen liiton, jonka olen tehnyt kaikkien elävien
olentojen, kaikkien maan päällä elävien kanssa."
Ja Jumala sanoi vielä Nooalle: "Tämä on sen
liiton merkki, jonka minä teen kaikkien maan päällä
elävien kanssa."
Nooan pojat, jotka lähtivät arkista, olivat
Seem, Haam ja Jafet, ja Haamista tuli Kanaanin isä.
Nämä kolme olivat Nooan pojat, ja heidän
jälkeläisiään ovat kaikki maailman ihmiset.
Nooa ryhtyi viljelemään maata ja istutti
ensimmäisen viinitarhan. 
Mutta kun hän joi
viiniä, hän juopui ja jäi alastomana makaamaan
telttaansa. 
Haam, Kanaanin isä, näki isänsä
alastomuuden ja kertoi siitä ulkona molemmille
veljilleen. 
Silloin Seem ja Jafet ottivat
viitan, levittivät sen harteilleen, menivät sisään
selkä edellä ja peittivät isänsä alastomuuden.
Heidän kasvonsa olivat poispäin, eivätkä he nähneet
isäänsä alastomana. 
Kun Nooa selvisi
juopumuksestaan ja sai kuulla, mitä hänen nuorin
poikansa oli hänelle tehnyt, 
hän sanoi:
-- Kirottu olkoon Kanaan,
tulkoon hänestä veljiensä
orjienkin orja.
Ja hän sanoi vielä:
-- Kiitetty olkoon Herra,
Seemin Jumala,
ja Kanaan olkoon Seemin orja.
Tehköön Jumala laajaksi Jafetin suvun,
ja saakoon se asua myös Seemin majoissa,
ja Kanaan olkoon heidän orjansa.
Nooa eli vedenpaisumuksen jälkeen vielä 350
vuotta. 
Kaikkiaan hän eli 950 vuotta, ja sitten
hän kuoli.
Nimi Jafet muistuttaa heprean sanaa jaft 'tehköön laa-jaksi'.
Tämä on luettelo Nooan poikien, Seemin, Haamin ja
Jafetin, jälkeläisistä. Vedenpaisumuksen jälkeen
heille syntyi poikia. 
Jafetin pojat olivat Gomer,
Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Mesek ja Tiras.
Gomerin pojat olivat Askenas, Rifat ja Togarma.
Javanin pojat olivat Elisa ja Tarsis; myös
kittiläiset ja rodanilaiset ovat hänen
jälkeläisiään. 
Näistä erkanivat omiin maihinsa
rannikoiden ja saarten kansat, kukin kansa kielensä
ja heimonsa mukaan.
Haamin pojat olivat Kus, Misraim, Put ja Kanaan.
Kusin pojat olivat Seba, Havila, Sabta, Raema ja
Sabteka. Raeman pojat olivat Saba ja Dedan.
Kusille syntyi myös Nimrod, josta tuli
ensimmäinen mahtava hallitsija maan päällä. 
Hän
oli suuri metsästäjä Jumalan armosta. Siksi onkin
tapana sanoa: "On kuin Nimrod, suuri metsästäjä
Jumalan armosta." 
Hän hallitsi aluksi Babylonia,
Erekiä, Akkadia ja Kalnea Sinearin maassa.
Sieltä hän siirtyi Assyriaan ja rakensi Niniven,
Rehobot-Irin, Kalahin 
ja Resenin suuren
kaupungin Niniven ja Kalahin välille. 
Misraimin
jälkeläisiä ovat ludilaiset, anamilaiset,
lehabilaiset, naftuhilaiset, 
patrosilaiset,
kasluhilaiset, joista filistealaiset ovat lähtöisin,
sekä kaftorilaiset. 
Kanaanille syntyivät Sidon,
hänen esikoisensa, sekä Het. 
Hänen jälkeläisiään
ovat myös jebusilaiset, amorilaiset, girgasilaiset,
hivviläiset, arkilaiset ja siniläiset, 
arvadilaiset, semeriläiset ja hamatilaiset.
Kanaanilaisten heimot hajaantuivat sittemmin, 
ja
kanaanilaisten alue ulottui Sidonista Gerarin
suuntaan Gazaan saakka sekä Sodoman ja Gomorran,
Adman ja Seboimin suuntaan Lesaan saakka. 
Nämä
olivat Haamin jälkeläisiä lueteltuina heimoittain ja
kielittäin, kukin maansa ja kansansa mukaan.
Myös Seemille syntyi poikia. Hän oli Jafetin
vanhempi veli, ja hänestä tuli kaikkien Eberin jälkeläisten kantaisä. 
Seemin pojat olivat Elam,
Assur, Arpaksad, Lud ja Aram. 
Aramin pojat
olivat Us, Hul, Geter ja Mas. 
Arpaksadille
syntyi Selah ja Selahille Eber. 
Eberille syntyi
kaksi poikaa. Toinen oli nimeltään Peleg, koska
hänen aikanaan ihmissuku hajaantui yli maan,
ja
toisen nimi oli Joktan. 
Joktanille syntyivät
Almodad, Selef, Hasarmavet, Jerah, 
Hadoram,
Usal, Dikla, 
Obal, Abimael, Saba, 
Ofir,
Havila ja Jobab. Nämä kaikki olivat Joktanin
jälkeläisiä. 
Heidän asuinalueensa ulottui
Mesasta Sefarin suuntaan idän vuoristoon saakka.
Nämä olivat Seemin jälkeläisiä lueteltuina
heimoittain ja kielittäin, kukin maansa ja kansansa
mukaan.
Nämä olivat Nooan poikien jälkeläiset
lueteltuina heimoittain ja kansoittain, ja heistä
haarautuivat kansat maailmaan vedenpaisumuksen
jälkeen.
Nimi Gomer tarkoittaa kimmeriläisiä, Madai Meediaa ja Javan
Kreikkaa, Jooniaa. Tubal ja Mesek sijoittuvat Vähään-Aasiaan, ja
Tiras tarkoittaa luultavasti etruskeja. Magogilla tarkoitettaneen
Mustanmeren pohjoispuolta. 
Kus on sama kuin Nubia, Misraim tarkoittaa Egyptiä, Put
Libyaa. 
Eteläarabialaisia ja nubialaisia heimoja. 
Erek on sama kuin Uruk, muinainen sumerilainen kaupunki,
nyk. Warka. Sinear on Babylonian toinen nimi. 
Nimi Aram viittaa Syyrian aramealaisiin. 
Nimi Peleg tulee heprean sanasta palag 'jakaantua', 'hajaantua'. 
Koko maailma käytti samoja sanoja ja puhui yhtä
kieltä. 
Kun ihmiset siirtyivät itään, he löysivät
Sinearin maasta tasangon ja jäivät sinne asumaan.
Ja he sanoivat toisilleen: "Tehkäämme tiiliä ja
polttakaamme ne koviksi." He käyttivät savitiiltä
rakennuskivenä ja asfalttipikeä muuraamiseen. 
He
sanoivat: "Rakentakaamme itsellemme kaupunki ja
torni, joka ulottuu taivaaseen asti. Sillä tavoin
saamme mainetta emmekä myöskään hajaannu yli koko
maan."
Herra tuli katsomaan kaupunkia ja tornia, jota
ihmiset rakensivat, 
ja sanoi: "Siinä he nyt ovat,
yksi kansa, jolla on yksi ja sama kieli. Tämä, mitä
he ovat saaneet aikaan, on vasta alkua. Nyt he pystyvät tekemään mitä tahansa. 
Menkäämme sekoittamaan heidän kielensä, niin etteivät he ymmärrä toistensa puhetta." 
Ja niin Herra hajotti heidät
sieltä kaikkialle maailmaan, ja he lakkasivat rakentamasta kaupunkia. 
Kaupunki sai nimen Babylon,
sillä siellä Herra sekoitti ihmisten kielen
ja
sieltä hän hajotti heidät kaikkialle maailmaan.
Tämä on luettelo Seemin jälkeläisistä. Seem oli
satavuotias, kun hänelle syntyi Arpaksad. Tämä
tapahtui kaksi vuotta vedenpaisumuksen jälkeen.
Arpaksadin syntymän jälkeen Seem eli vielä 500
vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Kun Arpaksad oli elänyt 35 vuotta, hänelle
syntyi Selah. 
Selahin syntymän jälkeen Arpaksad
eli vielä 403 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia
ja tyttäriä.
Kun Selah oli elänyt 30 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Eber. 
Eberin syntymän jälkeen Selah eli vielä
403 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä.
Kun Eber oli elänyt 34 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Peleg. 
Pelegin syntymän jälkeen Eber eli vielä
430 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Kun Peleg oli elänyt 30 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Reu. 
Reun syntymän jälkeen Peleg eli vielä 209
vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Kun Reu oli elänyt 32 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Serug. 
Serugin syntymän jälkeen Reu eli vielä
207 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja
tyttäriä.
Kun Serug oli elänyt 30 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Nahor. 
Nahorin syntymän jälkeen Serug eli vielä
200 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Kun Nahor oli elänyt 29 vuotta, hänelle syntyi
Terah. 
Terahin syntymän jälkeen Nahor eli vielä
119 vuotta, ja hänelle syntyi lisää poikia ja tyttäriä.
Kun Terah oli elänyt 70 vuotta, hänelle
syntyivät Abram, Nahor ja Haran.
Tämä on luettelo Terahin jälkeläisistä.
Terahille syntyivät Abram, Nahor ja Haran, ja
Haranille syntyi Loot. 
Haran kuoli ennen isäänsä
Terahia synnyinmaassaan Kaldean
Urissa. 
Abram
ja Nahor ottivat itselleen vaimot. Abramin vaimon
nimi oli Sarai, ja Nahorin vaimo oli Milka, Haranin
tytär. Haran oli Milkan ja Jiskan isä. 
Sarai oli
hedelmätön, hän ei saanut lasta.
Terah otti mukaansa poikansa Abramin, poikansa
Haranin pojan Lootin sekä Abramin vaimon Sarain ja
lähti kulkemaan heidän kanssaan Kaldean Urista
Kanaaninmaan suuntaan. Tultuaan Harraniin he jäivät
sinne asumaan. 
Terah eli kaikkiaan 205 vuotta ja
kuoli Harranissa.
; Judit 
Babylonin nimi (hepreaksi Babel) muistuttaa sanaa
balal 'sekoittaa'. 
Kaldea tarkoittaa Babyloniaa. 
Herra sanoi Abramille: "Lähde maastasi,
asuinsijoiltasi ja isäsi kodista siihen maahan,
jonka minä sinulle osoitan. 
Minä teen sinusta
suuren kansan ja siunaan sinua, ja sinun nimesi on
oleva suuri ja siinä on oleva siunaus. 
Minä
siunaan niitä, jotka siunaavat sinua, ja kiroan ne,
jotka sinua kiroavat, ja sinun saamasi siunaus tulee
siunaukseksi kaikille maailman kansoille."
Niin Abram lähti Herran käskyn mukaan, ja Loot
lähti hänen kanssaan. Harranista lähtiessään Abram
oli seitsemänkymmenenviiden vuoden ikäinen. 
Abram
otti mukaan vaimonsa Sarain ja veljenpoikansa Lootin
sekä perheiden koko omaisuuden, myös Harranissa
hankitut orjat. Sitten he lähtivät kulkemaan kohti
Kanaaninmaata ja saapuivat sinne.
Abram kulki Kanaaninmaan halki Sikemin seudulle,
Moren tammelle asti. Siihen aikaan maassa asuivat
kanaanilaiset. 
Herra ilmestyi Abramille ja sanoi:
"Sinun jälkeläisillesi minä annan tämän maan." Ja
Abram rakensi sinne alttarin Herralle, joka oli
ilmestynyt hänelle. 
Sieltä hän siirtyi Betelin
itäpuolen vuorille, ja hän pystytti telttansa niin,
että Betel oli länsipuolella ja Ai itäpuolella. Hän
rakensi sinne alttarin ja rukoili Herraa. 
Sieltä
Abram siirtyi paikasta toiseen etelään Negeviin
päin.
Sitten tuli maahan nälänhätä. Koska nälänhätä
oli kova, Abram siirtyi Egyptiin ja asui siellä
muukalaisena. 
Egyptiä lähestyttäessä hän sanoi
vaimolleen Saraille: "Minä tiedän, että sinä olet
kaunis nainen. 
Kun egyptiläiset näkevät sinut ja
käsittävät, että sinä olet minun vaimoni, he
tappavat minut mutta jättävät sinut henkiin.
Sano siis, että olet minun sisareni, jotta minua
kohdeltaisiin sinun takiasi hyvin ja saisin sinun
ansiostasi pitää henkeni."
Kun Abram saapui Egyptiin, egyptiläiset
havaitsivat, että Sarai oli hyvin kaunis nainen.
Sarain nähtyään faraon virkamiehet ylistivät
häntä faraolle, ja hänet haettiin palatsiin.
Farao kohteli Abramia hyvin Sarain takia, ja
Abram sai lampaita ja vuohia, nautakarjaa ja aaseja,
orjia ja orjattaria sekä aasintammoja ja kameleita.
Mutta Herra antoi faraon ja hänen palatsinsa
väen sairastua ankariin tauteihin Abramin vaimon
Sarain tähden. 
Silloin farao kutsutti Abramin
luokseen ja sanoi: "Mitä oletkaan minulle tehnyt!
Miksi et kertonut minulle, että hän on vaimosi?
Miksi sanoit häntä sisareksesi, niin että minä
saatoin ottaa hänet vaimokseni? Siinä on vaimosi,
ota hänet ja mene matkoihisi!" 
Sitten farao
antoi miehilleen käskyn toimittaa Abram, hänen
vaimonsa ja koko hänen omaisuutensa maasta pois.
Niin Abram palasi Egyptistä Negeviin, mukanaan
vaimonsa ja koko omaisuutensa, ja Loot seurasi häntä. 
Abram oli hyvin rikas; hänellä oli karjaa,
hopeaa ja kultaa. 
Negevistä hän siirtyi Beteliä
kohti kulkien leiripaikalta toiselle, kunnes saapui
siihen Betelin ja Ain väliseen paikkaan, jossa hänen
telttansa oli aikaisemmin ollut 
ja jonne hän oli
rakentanut alttarin. Siellä Abram rukoili Herraa.
Myös Lootilla, joka kulki Abramin mukana, oli
lampaita, vuohia, nautakarjaa ja telttoja. 
Mutta
laidunmaata ei ollut tarpeeksi, että he olisivat
voineet pysyä yhdessä, sillä heillä oli runsaasti
karjaa. 
Siksi Abramin ja Lootin karjapaimenten
kesken syntyi riitaa. Siihen aikaan maassa asui
kanaanilaisia ja perissiläisiä.
Abram sanoi Lootille: "Ei sovi, että meidän tai
meidän karjapaimentemme välillä on riitaa, sillä me
olemme sukulaisia ja veljiä keskenämme. 
Onhan
koko maa avoinna sinun edessäsi. Eroa siis minusta.
Jos sinä menet vasemmalle, niin minä menen oikealle.
Jos sinä menet oikealle, niin minä menen vasemmalle." 
Loot katsoi ympärilleen ja näki, että
Abram jäi Kanaaninmaahan, kun taas
Loot siirtyi telttoineen alangon kaupunkien
liepeille ja päätyi lopulta Sodomaan.
Mutta Sodoman asukkaat olivat turmeltuneita ja
tekivät paljon syntiä Herraa vastaan.
Lootin erottua Abramista Herra sanoi Abramille:
"Nosta silmäsi ja katsele tästä paikasta pohjoiseen,
etelään, itään ja länteen, 
sillä koko sen maan,
jonka näet, minä annan sinulle ja sinun jälkeläisillesi ikiajoiksi. 
Minä teen sinun jälkeläisesi
lukuisiksi kuin maan tomuhiukkaset: jos osaat ne
laskea, osaat laskea jälkeläistesi määrän. 
Lähde
vaeltamaan maata pitkin ja poikin, sillä minä annan
sen sinulle."
Abram siirtyi telttoineen paikasta toiseen, kunnes asettui Hebroniin
Mamren tammistoon. Sinne hän rakensi alttarin Herralle.
Siihen aikaan Sinearin kuningas Amrafel,
Ellasarin kuningas Arjok, Elamin kuningas
Kedorlaomer ja Gojimin kuningas Tideal 
lähtivät
sotaretkelle Sodoman kuningasta Beraa, Gomorran
kuningasta Birsaa, Adman kuningasta Sinabia,
Seboimin kuningasta Semeberiä ja Belan eli Soarin
kuningasta vastaan. 
Nämä viisi olivat kaikki
yhdessä koonneet joukkonsa Siddiminlaaksoon, missä
Kuollutmeri sijaitsee. 
He olivat kaksitoista
vuotta olleet Kedorlaomerin alaisina mutta nousivat
kolmantenatoista vuotena kapinaan.
Neljäntenätoista vuotena tulivat Kedorlaomer ja
hänen kanssaan liittoutuneet kuninkaat ja voittivat
refalaiset Asterot-Karnaimissa, susilaiset Hamissa,
emiläiset Kirjataimin tasangolla 
ja horilaiset
vuorilla, jotka ulottuvat Seiristä El-Paraniin,
autiomaan laidoille saakka. 
Sitten he kääntyivät
takaisin ja tulivat En-Mispatiin eli Kadesiin ja
kukistivat koko amalekilaisten maan ja myös
amorilaiset, jotka asuivat Haseson-Tamarissa.
Silloin Sodoman, Gomorran, Adman ja Seboimin kuninkaat sekä Belan eli
Soarin kuningas lähtivät liikkeelle ja järjestivät Siddiminlaaksossa
joukkonsa taisteluun
Elamin kuningasta
Kedorlaomeria, Gojimin kuningasta Tidealia, Sinearin
kuningasta Amrafelia ja Ellasarin kuningasta Arjokia
vastaan, viisi kuningasta neljää vastaan. 
Mutta
Siddiminlaakso oli täynnä maaöljykuoppia, ja kun
Sodoman ja Gomorran kuninkaat ja heidän miehensä
yrittivät kääntyä pakoon, he vajosivat niihin, ja
henkiin jääneet pakenivat vuorille. 
Heidän
vihollisensa veivät Sodomasta ja Gomorrasta kaiken
karjan ja muun omaisuuden sekä kaiken syötävän ja
lähtivät sitten pois. 
Lähtiessään he veivät myös
Abramin veljenpojan Lootin ja koko tämän omaisuuden.
Loot näet asui siihen aikaan Sodomassa.
Muuan pakoon päässyt tuli kertomaan tästä
heprealaiselle Abramille, joka tuolloin asui
amorilaisen Mamren tammistossa. Mamre oli Eskolin ja
Anerin veli, ja he olivat liitossa Abramin kanssa.
Kun Abram kuuli, että hänen veljenpoikansa oli
joutunut vangiksi, hän aseisti taistelukelpoiset
miehensä, jotka olivat syntyneet hänen teltoissaan,
kolmesataakahdeksantoista miestä kaikkiaan, lähti
kuninkaiden perään ja tavoitti heidät Danissa.
Siellä hän jakoi väkensä ryhmiin ja hyökkäsi
yöllä vihollisten kimppuun, voitti heidät ja ajoi
heitä takaa aina Hobaan, joka on Damaskoksesta
pohjoiseen. 
Hän otti takaisin kaiken saaliin
samoin kuin sukulaisensa Lootin, tämän omaisuuden
sekä naiset ja muun väen.
Kun Abram oli paluumatkalla lyötyään Kedorlaomerin ja hänen kanssaan
liittoutuneet kuninkaat, Sodoman kuningas tuli häntä vastaan
Savenlaaksoon, jota sanotaan myös Kuninkaanlaaksoksi.
Salemin
kuningas Melkisedek toi sinne leipää ja viiniä. Hän
oli Korkeimman Jumalan pappi, 
ja hän siunasi
Abramia sanoen:
-- Siunatkoon Abramia
Korkein Jumala,
taivaan ja maan luoja.
Kiitetty olkoon Korkein Jumala,
joka antoi sinun lyödä vastustajasi.
Abram antoi hänelle kymmenykset kaikesta saaliista.
Sodoman kuningas sanoi Abramille: "Anna minulle
ihmiset. Karjan ja tavaran voit pitää itse."
Silloin Abram sanoi Sodoman kuninkaalle: "Minä
nostan käteni Herran, Korkeimman Jumalan, puoleen,
joka on luonut taivaan ja maan, ja vannon: 
minä
en ota mitään sinun omaasi, en edes langanpätkää tai
sandaalinhihnaa. Silloin et voi sanoa: 'Minä olen
tehnyt Abramista rikkaan.' 
Minä en tahdo mitään
sen lisäksi, mitä palvelijani ovat syöneet ja mikä
kuuluu niille miehille, jotka seurasivat minua. Myös
Aner, Eskol ja Mamre saakoot oman osuutensa."
| 
Näiden tapausten jälkeen tuli Abramille näyssä
tämä Herran sana: "Älä pelkää, Abram. Minä olen
sinun kilpesi, ja sinun palkkasi on oleva hyvin
suuri." 
Abram sanoi: "Herra, minun Jumalani, mitä
sinä minulle antaisit? Olenhan jäänyt lapsettomaksi,
ja minun omaisuuteni perii damaskolainen Elieser."
Abram sanoi vielä: "Ethän ole antanut minulle
jälkeläistä, ja siksi palvelijani saa periä minut."
Mutta hänelle tuli tämä Herran sana: "Ei hän
sinua peri, vaan sinut perii sinun oma poikasi."
Ja Herra vei hänet ulos ja sanoi: "Katso taivaalle ja laske tähdet,
jos kykenet ne laskemaan. Yhtä suuri on oleva sinun jälkeläistesi
määrä."
Abram
uskoi Herran lupaukseen, ja Herra katsoi hänet
vanhurskaaksi.
Herra sanoi Abramille: "Minä olen Herra, joka
toin sinut Kaldean Urista antaakseni sinun omaksesi
tämän maan." 
Mutta Abram kysyi: "Herra, minun
Jumalani, mistä minä voin tietää, että saan sen
omakseni?" 
Silloin Herra sanoi hänelle: "Hae
kolmivuotias hieho, kolmivuotias vuohi, kolmivuotias
pässi, metsäkyyhky ja kyyhkysenpoikanen." 
Ja
Abram haki ne kaikki, halkaisi ne keskeltä ja asetti
kunkin eläimen puolikkaat vastakkain; lintuja hän ei
kuitenkaan halkaissut. 
Kun ruhojen päälle
laskeutui petolintuja, Abram ajoi ne pois.
Auringon laskiessa Abram vaipui horrokseen, ja
synkkä kauhu valtasi hänet. 
Silloin Herra sanoi
hänelle: "Sinun tulee tietää, että jälkeläisesi
joutuvat elämään muukalaisina maassa, joka ei ole
heidän omansa. Heistä tulee siellä orjia, ja heitä
sorretaan neljäsataa vuotta. 
Mutta minä
rankaisen myös sitä vierasta kansaa, jonka orjiksi
he joutuvat, ja he pääsevät lähtemään sieltä suuri
omaisuus mukanaan. 
Sinä itse saat kuitenkin
mennä rauhassa isiesi luo ja pääset hautaan hyvän
vanhuuden jälkeen. 
Sinun jälkeläisistäsi palaa
tänne vasta neljäs sukupolvi, sillä amorilaisten
syntien määrä ei vielä ole täyttynyt."
Auringon laskettua tuli pilkkopimeä, ja silloin
näkyi uunin savuava roihu ja soihdun lieska, joka
liikkui uhrilihojen välissä. 
Sinä päivänä Herra
teki Abramin kanssa liiton ja lupasi hänelle: "Sinun
jälkeläisillesi minä annan tämän maan Egyptin rajapurosta Eufratin suureen virtaan saakka, 
tämän
maan, jossa asuvat keniläiset, kenasilaiset ja kadmonilaiset, 
heettiläiset, perissiläiset ja refalaiset, 
amorilaiset, kanaanilaiset,
girgasilaiset ja jebusilaiset."
Amorilaiset olivat eräs mm. Palestiinaan levinnyt seemiläinen
kansanheimo. Tässä amorilaisilla tarkoitetaan kanaanilaisia yleensä.
Sarai, Abramin vaimo, ei ollut synnyttänyt
miehelleen lasta. Mutta Sarailla oli egyptiläinen
orjatar, jonka nimi oli Hagar. 
Niin Sarai sanoi
Abramille: "Herra ei ole sallinut minun synnyttää.
Makaa siis minun orjattareni kanssa; ehkäpä hän voi
synnyttää minulle lapsen." Abram myöntyi Sarain
ehdotukseen. 
Abram oli asunut kymmenen vuotta
Kanaaninmaassa, kun hänen vaimonsa Sarai antoi egyptiläisen orjattarensa Hagarin miehelleen Abramille
sivuvaimoksi. 
Abram yhtyi Hagariin, ja tämä tuli
raskaaksi. Kun Hagar huomasi olevansa raskaana, hän
alkoi väheksyä emäntäänsä. 
Silloin Sarai sanoi
Abramille: "Minua on loukattu, etkä sinä tee mitään.
Minä itse annoin orjattareni sinun syliisi, mutta
siitä saakka, kun hän sai tietää olevansa raskaana,
hän on halveksinut minua. Herra ratkaiskoon meidän
riitamme." 
Abram sanoi Saraille: "Hän on sinun
orjattaresi. Voit tehdä hänelle, mitä hyväksi näet."
Ja Sarai kuritti Hagaria niin että Hagar pakeni
hänen luotaan.
Herran enkeli kohtasi Hagarin autiomaassa
vesilähteellä, joka oli Surin tien varressa. 
Hän
sanoi: "Hagar, Sarain orjatar, mistä olet tulossa ja
minne olet menossa?" Hagar vastasi: "Minä olen
paennut emäntäni Sarain luota." 
Silloin Herran
enkeli sanoi hänelle: "Palaa emäntäsi luo ja ota
nöyrästi vastaan hänen kurituksensa." 
Herran enkeli sanoi hänelle vielä: "Minä teen sinun jälkeläistesi
määrän niin suureksi, ettei sitä voi laskea."
Sitten Herran enkeli sanoi hänelle:
-- Sinä olet raskaana, ja kun synnytät pojan,
anna hänelle nimeksi Ismael,
sillä Herra kuuli,
kun valitit hätääsi.
Poikasi on oleva kuin villiaasi,
hänen kätensä on kaikkia vastaan,
ja kaikkien käsi on häntä vastaan,
aina hän on oleva vastakkain kaikkien veljiensä
kanssa.
Niin Hagar alkoi kutsua Herraa, joka oli puhunut
hänelle, nimellä El-Roi, 'Jumala joka minut näkee',
sillä hän ajatteli: "Olenko todella saanut tässä
paikassa nähdä hänet, joka valvoo askeleitani?"
Siksi alettiin tuota Kadesin ja Beredin välillä
sijaitsevaa vesipaikkaa nimittää Lahai-Roin kaivoksi
.
Hagar synnytti Abramille pojan, ja Abram antoi
pojalleen, jonka Hagar oli synnyttänyt, nimen
Ismael. 
Abram oli kahdeksankymmentäkuusivuotias,
kun Hagar synnytti hänelle Ismaelin.
Nimi Ismael merkitsee 'Jumala kuulee'. 
»Lahai-Roin kaivo» merkitsee 'sen kaivo, joka elää ja näkee minut'. 
Kun Abram oli yhdeksänkymmenenyhdeksän vuoden
ikäinen, Herra ilmestyi hänelle ja sanoi: "Minä olen
Jumala, Kaikkivaltias. Vaella koko sydämestäsi minun
tahtoni mukaisesti, 
niin minä otan sinut liittoon
kanssani ja teen suureksi sinun jälkeläistesi määrän." 
Abram heittäytyi kasvoilleen, ja Jumala
sanoi hänelle: 
"Tällainen on liitto, johon minä
sinut otan. Sinusta on tuleva monien kansojen kantaisä. 
Älköön siis nimesi enää olko Abram, vaan
olkoon se Abraham
, koska minä teen sinusta kansojen
paljouden isän. 
Minä annan sinulle paljon jälkeläisiä, ja sinusta on polveutuva kansakuntia ja
kuninkaita. 
Minä pidän voimassa liiton sinun ja
myös sinun jälkeläistesi kanssa, ikuisen liiton
sukupolvesta toiseen, ja minä olen oleva sinun Jumalasi ja sinun jälkeläistesi Jumala. 
Minä annan
sinulle ja jälkeläisillesi pysyväksi perintömaaksi
koko Kanaaninmaan, jossa nyt asut muukalaisena, ja
minä olen myös sinun jälkeläistesi Jumala."
Jumala puhui edelleen Abrahamille: "Pysykää
uskollisesti tässä liitossa, sinä ja sinun
jälkeläisesi sukupolvesta toiseen. 
Tämä ehto
teidän on täytettävä siinä liitossa, jonka olen
tehnyt sinun ja sinun jälkeläistesi kanssa: teidän
tulee ympärileikata jokainen mies ja poikalapsi.
Leikkauttakaa pois esinahkanne. Tämä on merkkinä
liitosta, joka on meidän välillämme, minun ja
teidän. 
Kahdeksantena päivänä syntymästä
ympärileikattakoon jokainen poikalapsi sukupolvesta
toiseen. Ympärileikattakoon kaikki talossasi
syntyneet orjat samoin kuin heimoosi kuulumattomat
orjat, jotka itsellesi ostat, 
siis jokainen
talossasi syntynyt tai rahalla ostamasi orja. Näin
te kannatte ruumiissanne merkkiä siitä, että minun
tekemäni liitto on ikuinen. 
Mutta jokainen
ympärileikkaamaton poistettakoon kansansa parista.
Hän on rikkonut liiton."
Jumala sanoi vielä Abrahamille: "Vaimoasi
Saraita älä enää kutsu Saraiksi, vaan hänen nimensä
olkoon Saara. 
Minä siunaan häntä ja annan hänen
synnyttää sinulle pojan. Minä siunaan häntä: monet
kansakunnat saavat hänestä alkunsa, ja hänestä
polveutuu kansojen kuninkaita."
Abraham
heittäytyi kasvoilleen, mutta naurahti, sillä hän
ajatteli: "Voiko satavuotiaalle miehelle muka syntyä
lapsia, ja voisiko Saara, joka on yhdeksänkymmenen,
vielä synnyttää?" 
Ja Abraham sanoi Jumalalle:
"Kunpa Ismael saisi elää sinun huolenpitosi alaisena!" 
Jumala sanoi: "Vaimosi Saara synnyttää
sinulle pojan, ja sinun tulee antaa hänelle nimeksi
Iisak
. Minä pidän voimassa liiton myös hänen
kanssaan, ja se pysyy ikuisesti voimassa hänen
jälkeläistensäkin kanssa. 
Ja minä toteutan myös
sen, mitä pyysit Ismaelin puolesta. Minä siunaan
häntä, teen hänet hedelmälliseksi ja annan hänelle
suuren joukon jälkeläisiä. Hänestä tulee
kahdentoista ruhtinaan isä, ja minä teen hänestä
suuren kansan. 
Mutta minun liittoni jatkuu
Iisakin kanssa, jonka Saara synnyttää ensi vuonna
tähän aikaan."
Sanottuaan tämän kaiken Abrahamille Jumala
kohosi hänen luotaan pois.
Niin Abraham ympärileikkasi vielä samana päivänä
poikansa Ismaelin ja talonsa muut miehet ja poikalapset, sekä oman väen että rahalla ostamansa orjat,
kuten Jumala oli käskenyt hänen tehdä. 
Abraham
oli yhdeksänkymmentäyhdeksänvuotias, kun hänen
esinahkansa leikattiin, 
ja hänen poikansa Ismael
oli kolmetoistavuotias, kun hänen esinahkansa
leikattiin. 
Tuona samana päivänä
ympärileikattiin Abraham, hänen poikansa Ismael
ja heidän kanssaan kaikki palvelijat, sekä
talossa syntyneet että muukalaisten joukosta
ostetut.
Nimi Abraham muistuttaa heprean sanoja, jotka merkitsevät
'kansojen paljouden isä'. 
Nimi Saara merkitsee 'ruhtinatar'. 
Nimi Iisak merkitsee 'hän nauraa'. 
Herra ilmestyi Abrahamille Mamren tammistossa.
Abraham istui telttansa ovella päivän ollessa
kuumimmillaan, 
ja kun hän kohotti katseensa, hän
näki kolmen miehen lähestyvän. Heti heidät nähtyään
hän juoksi teltan ovelta heitä vastaan ja tervehti
heitä kumartaen maahan asti. 
Hän sanoi: "Herrani,
suothan minulle sen kunnian, ettet kulje palvelijasi
ohi. 
Saanko tuoda teille vähän vettä, jotta
voitte pestä jalkanne ja levähtää puun varjossa?
Minä haen hiukan syötävää, niin että voitte virkistäytyä ennen kuin
jatkatte matkaanne. Levähtääksenne te varmaan poikkesitte minun,
palvelijanne luo." He sanoivat: "Hyvä on, tee niin."
Abraham riensi telttaan Saaran luo ja sanoi: "Hae
joutuin kolme vakallista parhaita vehnäjauhoja, tee
taikina ja leivo leipiä!" 
Sitten hän kiiruhti
karjansa luo, otti nuoren ja kauniin vasikan ja
antoi sen palvelijalle, joka heti ryhtyi valmistamaan ateriaa. 
Hän toi tuoretta voita, maitoa ja palvelijan valmistaman vasikan,
asetti ruoan vieraittensa eteen ja jäi puun alle seisomaan ja
palvelemaan heitä heidän syödessään.
Miehet kysyivät Abrahamilta: "Missä on vaimosi
Saara?" Hän vastasi: "Tuolla teltassa." 
Silloin yksi heistä sanoi: "Ensi vuonna minä palaan sinun luoksesi
tähän samaan aikaan, ja silloin on vaimollasi Saaralla poika." Mutta
Saara oli hänen takanaan teltan ovella kuuntelemassa.
Abraham ja Saara
olivat jo vanhoja ja ikääntyneitä, eikä Saara voinut
enää saada lasta. 
Siksi Saara naurahti itsekseen
ja ajatteli: "Voisiko näin kuihtuneessa naisessa
vielä herätä halu? Miehenikin on jo käynyt vanhaksi." 
Silloin Herra kysyi Abrahamilta: "Miksi
Saara nauroi? Miksi hän ajatteli: 'Voisinko minä
todella vielä synnyttää, vaikka olen näin vanha?'
Onko Herralle mikään mahdotonta? Ensi vuonna
minä palaan luoksesi tähän samaan aikaan, ja silloin
Saaralla on poika." 
Saara väitti: "En minä
nauranut", sillä hän oli peloissaan. Mutta Herra
sanoi: "Saara, kyllä sinä nauroit."
Sitten miehet nousivat ja lähtivät Sodomaan
päin, ja Abraham saattoi heitä kappaleen matkaa.
Herra ajatteli: "Miksi salaisin Abrahamilta,
mitä aion tehdä? 
Onhan Abrahamista polveutuva
suuri ja mahtava kansa, ja hänen saamansa siunaus
tulee siunaukseksi kaikille maailman kansoille.
Minähän olen valinnut hänet, että hän käskisi
poikiaan ja jälkeentulevaa sukuaan pysymään Herran
tiellä ja noudattamaan oikeutta ja vanhurskautta,
jotta minä voisin täyttää sen lupauksen, jonka olen
Abrahamille antanut." 
Ja Herra sanoi:
"Valitushuuto Sodoman ja Gomorran asukkaiden takia
on suuri ja heidän syntinsä on hyvin raskas.
Siksi minä aion mennä sinne katsomaan, ovatko he
todella tehneet kaiken sen pahan, mistä valitetaan.
Minä haluan saada siitä selvän."
Miehet lähtivät kulkemaan Sodomaan päin, mutta
Herra jäi vielä puhumaan Abrahamin kanssa. 
Abraham astui lähemmäksi ja kysyi: "Aiotko sinä tuhota
vanhurskaan yhdessä jumalattoman kanssa? 
Ehkä
kaupungissa on viisikymmentä hurskasta. Tuhoaisitko
sen silloinkin? Etkö armahtaisi tuota paikkaa niiden
viidenkymmenen oikeamielisen vuoksi, jotka siellä
asuvat? 
On mahdotonta, että surmaisit syyttömät
yhdessä syyllisten kanssa ja että syyttömien kävisi
samoin kuin syyllisten. Ethän voi tehdä niin! Eikö
koko maailman tuomari tuomitsisi oikein?" 
Herra sanoi: "Jos löydän Sodomasta viisikymmentä hurskasta, niin
heidän tähtensä minä säästän koko kaupungin."
Abraham vastasi: "Minä olen rohjennut puhua
sinulle, Herra, vaikka olenkin vain tomua ja tuhkaa.
Entä jos niistä viidestäkymmenestä puuttuu
viisi? Hävittäisitkö viiden vuoksi koko kaupungin?"
Herra vastasi: "En hävitä, jos löydän sieltä neljäkymmentäviisi." 
Abraham kysyi vielä: "Entä jos
siellä on neljäkymmentä?" Herra sanoi: "Niiden
neljänkymmenen takia minä säästän sen." 
Abraham
sanoi: "Älä suutu, Herra, vaikka puhunkin vielä.
Entä jos siellä on kolmekymmentä?" Herra vastasi:
"En hävitä sitä, jos löydän sieltä kolmekymmentä."
Mutta Abraham sanoi: "Saanko vielä puhua
sinulle, Herra? Entä jos sieltä löytyy vain
kaksikymmentä?" Herra sanoi: "Niiden kahdenkymmenen
takia jätän sen hävittämättä." 
Mutta Abraham
sanoi: "Älä suutu, Herra, vaikka puhun vielä tämän
kerran. Entä jos sieltä löytyy kymmenen?" Herra
sanoi: "Niiden kymmenen takia jätän sen
hävittämättä."
Tämän sanottuaan Herra lähti pois, ja Abraham
palasi kotiinsa.
; Sir. 
Kun enkelit saapuivat illan suussa Sodomaan, oli
Loot istumassa kaupunginportin aukiolla. Heidät
nähdessään hän nousi, meni heitä vastaan, heittäytyi
kasvoilleen maahan 
ja tervehti heitä sanoen:
"Tulkaa, herrani, minun matalaan majaani yöksi, niin
voitte pestä matkan pölyt jaloistanne. Heti aamusta
voitte sitten jatkaa matkaanne." He vastasivat: "Ei,
me yövymme ulkosalla." 
Mutta Loot pyyteli heitä
hartaasti, kunnes he lähtivät hänen mukaansa ja
tulivat hänen kotiinsa. Hän valmisti heille runsaan
aterian ja leipoi happamattomia leipiä, ja he söivät.
Ennen kuin he olivat asettuneet levolle,
kokoontuivat talon eteen Sodoman asukkaat, kaupungin
kaikki miehet, niin nuoret kuin vanhatkin. 
He
huusivat Lootia ja sanoivat hänelle: "Missä ovat ne
miehet, jotka tulivat tänä iltana luoksesi? Tuo
heidät tänne, me haluamme maata heidät!" 
Loot
meni ulos heidän luokseen, mutta sulki oven
perässään. 
Hän sanoi: "Hyvät miehet, älkää
sentään tehkö niin pahaa tekoa. 
Minulla on kaksi
tytärtä, jotka ovat vielä neitsyitä. Minä tuon
heidät teille, saatte tehdä heille mitä haluatte.
Mutta näihin miehiin älkää koskeko, sillä he ovat
hakeneet suojaa minun kattoni alta." 
He sanoivat:
"Pois tieltä! Tuo yksi on tullut muukalaisena tänne
asumaan, ja hän pyrkii jo määräilemään meitä. Nyt
sinun käy vielä pahemmin kuin noiden miesten!" Ja he
kävivät Lootin kimppuun ja ryhtyivät murtamaan ovea.
Mutta miehet, jotka olivat talossa, ojensivat
kätensä, vetivät Lootin sisälle ja sulkivat oven.
Taloon pyrkivien miesten silmät he sokaisivat
niin, ettei yksikään enää kyennyt löytämään ovea.
Vieraat sanoivat Lootille: "Jos sinulla on
täällä kaupungissa vielä joku, vävy tai poika tai
tyttäriä tai joku muu läheinen, niin vie heidät
täältä pois, 
sillä me hävitämme tämän paikan.
Herra on saanut kuulla niin ankaran valituksen tätä
kaupunkia vastaan, että hän on lähettänyt meidät
hävittämään sen." 
Niin Loot lähti puhumaan
miehille, jotka olivat kihlanneet hänen tyttärensä,
ja sanoi: "Pian pois täältä, pitäkää kiirettä! Herra
hävittää tämän kaupungin!" Mutta he vain
naureskelivat hänen puheilleen.
Kun aamu jo alkoi sarastaa, enkelit kiirehtivät Lootia ja sanoivat:
"Lähde heti ja ota mukaasi vaimosi ja kaksi tytärtäsi, jotka ovat
täällä, muuten saat surmasi tämän kaupungin syntitaakan tähden!"
Kun hän vieläkin vitkasteli, miehet
ottivat kädestä häntä, hänen vaimoaan ja molempia
tyttäriään, veivät heidät ulos ja päästivät irti
vasta kaupungin ulkopuolella -- Herra oli näet
päättänyt säästää heidät. 
Viedessään heitä ulos
toinen miehistä sanoi Lootille: "Pakene henkesi
edestä! Älä katso taaksesi äläkä pysähdy ennen kuin
olet päässyt pois tältä tasangolta. Pakene
vuoristoon, muuten olet mennyttä." 
Mutta Loot
vastasi hänelle: "Voi ei, herrani! 
Sinä olet jo
osoittanut minulle, palvelijallesi, suurta armoa ja
laupeutta, kun sallit minun pitää henkeni. Mutta
vuorille minä en uskalla yrittää: pelkään, että tuho
saavuttaa minut ja minäkin kuolen. 
Tuo kaupunki
tuolla on niin lähellä, että ehdin paeta sinne, ja
se on kovin vähäpätöinen. Sehän on liian mitätön
hävitettäväksi; enkö saisi paeta sinne ja silti
säilyttää henkeni?" 
Mies sanoi: "Minä suostun
sinun pyyntöösi vielä tässäkin asiassa enkä tuhoa
tuota kaupunkia. 
Pakene kiireesti sinne, sillä
minä en voi tehdä mitään ennen kuin olet siellä." -Tästä on peräisin kaupungin nimi Soar.
Kun aurinko oli noussut vuorten yläpuolelle ja
Loot oli tullut Soariin, 
Herra antoi sataa taivaasta tulta ja tulikiveä Sodoman ja Gomorran päälle. 
Hän tuhosi nämä kaupungit ja koko tasangon
sekä kaupunkien kaikki asukkaat ja maan kasvitkin.
Mutta Lootin vaimo katsoi taakseen ja muuttui
suolapatsaaksi.
Aamulla Abraham meni paikalle, jossa oli seissyt
Herran kasvojen edessä. 
Hän katseli Sodoman ja
Gomorran suuntaan ja yli koko tasangon, ja silloin
hän näki, että maasta nousi savua kuin polttouunista. 
Mutta kun Jumala hävitti tasangon kaupungit,
hän piti Abrahamin mielessään, ja sen vuoksi hän
toimitti Lootin pois tuhon keskeltä ennen kuin hävitti kaupungit, joissa Loot oli asunut.
Sitten Loot lähti Soarista ja asettui vuorille,
ja hänen kaksi tytärtään seurasivat hänen mukanaan.
Hän pelkäsi asua Soarissa ja asettui siksi molempien
tyttäriensä kanssa luolaan asumaan.
Vanhempi tytär sanoi nuoremmalle: "Isä alkaa
tulla vanhaksi, eikä maassa ole yhtään miestä, joka
voisi tulla ottamaan meidät vaimokseen yleisen tavan
mukaisesti. 
Juotetaan isälle viiniä ja maataan
hänen kanssaan, että saisimme isämme avulla lapsia
ja sukumme säilyisi." 
Illalla he juottivat
viiniä isälleen, ja vanhempi makasi isänsä kanssa,
eikä Loot huomannut, milloin tytär tuli hänen
viereensä ja milloin hän lähti. 
Seuraavana
päivänä vanhempi sanoi nuoremmalle: "Minä makasin
eilisiltana isän kanssa. Juotetaan hänelle viiniä
tänäkin iltana, ja mene sinä nyt makaamaan hänen
kanssaan, että saisimme isämme avulla lapsia ja
sukumme säilyisi." 
Ja he juottivat sinäkin
iltana viiniä isälleen, ja nuorempi meni makaamaan
hänen kanssaan, eikä Loot huomannut, milloin tytär
tuli hänen viereensä ja milloin hän lähti.
Niin Lootin molemmat tyttäret tulivat raskaaksi
isästään. 
Vanhempi synnytti pojan ja antoi
hänelle nimeksi Moab
; hänestä tuli nykyisten
moabilaisten kantaisä. 
Nuorempi synnytti hänkin
pojan ja antoi tälle nimeksi Ben-Ammi
; hänestä tuli
nykyisten ammonilaisten kantaisä.
; Viis. 
Viis. 
Viis. 
Nimi Soar merkitsee 'vähäinen', 'pieni'. 
Nimi Moab muistuttaa heprean sanaa me'ab 'isästä'. 
Nimi Ben-Ammi merkitsee 'oman kansani poika' ja viittaa ammonilaisiin. 
Abraham siirtyi Mamren tammistosta Negeviin ja
asettui asumaan Kadesin ja Surin välille. Sitten hän
muutti siirtolaiseksi Gerarin kaupunkiin. 
Siellä
Abraham sanoi vaimostaan Saarasta: "Hän on minun
sisareni." Niin Gerarin kuningas Abimelek haetti
Saaran luokseen.
Mutta Jumala tuli Abimelekin luo yöllä unessa ja
sanoi hänelle: "Sinun on kuoltava sen naisen vuoksi,
jonka olet ottanut, sillä hän on toisen miehen
vaimo." 
Abimelek ei ollut kuitenkaan kajonnut
häneen, ja siksi hän sanoi: "Herra, et kai surmaa
syytöntä? 
Mieshän sanoi minulle: 'Hän on minun
sisareni.' Ja Saara sanoi itsekin: 'Hän on minun
veljeni.' Minä olen tehnyt tämän vilpittömin mielin
ja tietämättä tekeväni vääryyttä." 
Jumala sanoi hänelle unessa: "Minäkin tiedän, että teit tämän
vilpittömin mielin, ja niin minä estin sinua tekemästä syntiä minua
vastaan. Sen vuoksi minä en sallinut sinun koskea häneen.
Anna nyt miehelle
takaisin hänen vaimonsa, sillä se mies on profeetta,
ja kun hän rukoilee puolestasi, sinä saat elää.
Mutta ellet anna häntä takaisin, niin tiedä, että
sinun on kuoltava, sekä sinun että kaikkien läheistesi."
Aamulla herättyään Abimelek kutsui luokseen
kaikki hovinsa miehet ja kertoi heille unensa.
Miehet pelästyivät kovin. 
Abimelek haetti
luokseen Abrahamin ja sanoi hänelle: "Mitä oletkaan
tehnyt meille! Miten minä olen rikkonut sinua
vastaan, kun olet asettanut minut ja valtakuntani
vastuuseen näin suuresta synnistä? Sellaista, mitä
sinä olet minulle tehnyt, ei kukaan saisi tehdä."
Abimelek kysyi vielä Abrahamilta: "Mitä sinulla
oli mielessä, kun niin teit?" 
Abraham vastasi:
"Minä ajattelin: 'Tällä seudulla varmaankin
jumalanpelko on tuntematon, ja siksi nämä ihmiset
tappavat minut ja ottavat vaimoni.' 
Sitä paitsi
hän on todella minun sisareni, isäni tytär, vaikka
meillä onkin eri äiti. Niin olen saattanut ottaa
hänet vaimokseni. 
Mutta kun Jumala vei minut
kauas isäni suvusta, minä sanoin vaimolleni: 'Tee
minulle tämä palvelus: sano kaikkialla, minne
menemmekin, että minä olen sinun veljesi.'"
Niin Abimelek antoi Abrahamille lampaita, vuohia
ja nautakarjaa sekä orjia ja orjattaria ja lähetti
takaisin hänen vaimonsa Saaran. 
Ja Abimelek sanoi: "Minun maani on avoinna edessäsi, saat asettua
minne vain haluat." 
Saaralle hän sanoi: "Minä
annan tuhat sekeliä hopeaa veljellesi. Olkoon se
vakuutena kaikille omillesi sinun viattomuudestasi
ja todisteena sinun kunniallisuudestasi."
Abraham rukoili Jumalaa, ja Jumala päästi Abimelekin kirouksesta ja
paransi hänen vaimonsa ja orjattarensa, niin että he saattoivat
jälleen saada lapsia.
Herra oli näet Abrahamin vaimon Saaran
takia tehnyt Abimelekin palatsin jokaisen naisen
hedelmättömäksi.
Herra piti huolen Saarasta, kuten oli sanonut, ja
täytti antamansa lupauksen. 
Saara tuli raskaaksi
ja synnytti Abrahamille hänen vanhoilla päivillään
pojan. Se tapahtui juuri siihen aikaan, jonka Jumala
oli ilmoittanut. 
Pojalleen, jonka Saara oli
synnyttänyt, Abraham antoi nimeksi Iisak. 
Kahdeksantena päivänä Iisakin syntymästä Abraham ympärileikkasi hänet,
kuten Jumala oli käskenyt.
Abraham oli satavuotias, kun hänen poikansa Iisak
syntyi. 
Saara sanoi: "Jumala on antanut minulle
aiheen iloon ja nauruun, ja jokainen, joka tästä
kuulee, iloitsee ja nauraa minun kanssani."
Ja Saara sanoi vielä: "Kuka olisi tiennyt sanoa
Abrahamille: 'Saara imettää poikia'? Ja nyt minä
kuitenkin olen synnyttänyt pojan hänen vanhoilla
päivillään."
Iisak kasvoi, ja hänet vieroitettiin, ja Abraham
järjesti Iisakin vieroituspäivänä suuret pidot.
Saara huomasi, että Abrahamin ja egyptiläisen
Hagarin poika Ismael ilvehti, 
ja silloin hän
sanoi Abrahamille: "Aja pois tuo orjatar ja hänen
poikansa. Orjattaren poika ei saa periä yhdessä
minun poikani Iisakin kanssa." 
Tämän kuullessaan
Abraham pahastui kovin Ismaelin puolesta. 
Mutta
Jumala sanoi Abrahamille: "Älä niin kovin sure tuon
pojan ja orjattaresi puolesta, vaan noudata kaikessa
Saaran mieltä, sillä vain Iisakin jälkeläisiä sanotaan sinun lapsiksesi. 
Mutta myös orjattaren
pojasta minä annan kasvaa suuren kansan, sillä hänkin on sinun jälkeläisesi."
Abraham nousi aamulla varhain, otti leipää ja
vesileilin, pani ne Hagarin selkään ja lähetti hänet
ja Ismaelin matkaan. Hagar lähti ja harhaili Beerseban autiomaassa. 
Mutta kun vesi loppui leilistä,
hän jätti pojan pensaan alle 
ja meni istumaan
syrjemmälle, noin jousenkantaman päähän, sillä hän
ajatteli: "Minä en kestä nähdä lapsen kuolevan." Ja
Hagarin istuessa syrjempänä poika alkoi ääneensä
itkeä. 
Jumala kuuli pojan valituksen, ja Jumalan
enkeli kutsui taivaasta Hagaria ja sanoi hänelle:
"Mikä sinun on, Hagar? Älä ole huolissasi. Jumala on
kuullut pojan itkun. 
Nouse, nosta poika maasta
ja pidä hänestä hyvää huolta. Minä annan hänestä
polveutua suuren kansan." 
Ja Jumala avasi
Hagarin silmät, niin että hän näki lähellään kaivon,
ja hän meni täyttämään leilin vedellä ja antoi pojan
juoda.
Poika kasvoi aikuiseksi, ja Jumala oli hänen
kanssaan. Hän jäi autiomaahan asumaan, ja hänestä
tuli taitava jousimies. 
Hän asui Paranin
autiomaassa, ja hänen äitinsä otti hänelle vaimon
Egyptistä.
Niihin aikoihin Abimelek ja hänen sotaväkensä
päällikkö Pikol sanoivat Abrahamille: "Jumala on
sinun kanssasi kaikessa mitä teet. 
Vanno nyt
minulle Jumalan kautta, ettet ole petollinen minua
etkä minun sukuani etkä jälkeläisiäni kohtaan, vaan
osoitat minua ja tätä maata kohtaan, missä nyt asut
muukalaisena, samaa vilpittömyyttä ja hyvyyttä, jota
minä olen sinulle osoittanut." 
Abraham sanoi:
"Minä vannon."
Abraham valitti kuitenkin Abimelekille, että
tämän miehet olivat anastaneet erään kaivon omaan
käyttöönsä. 
Abimelek sanoi: "Minä en tiedä, kuka tämän on tehnyt. Sinä et ole
puhunut siitä aikaisemmin, vasta nyt kuulen siitä ensimmäisen kerran."
Sitten Abraham antoi Abimelekille lampaita,
vuohia ja nautakarjaa, ja he tekivät keskenään
liiton. 
Mutta Abraham otti seitsemän nuorta
lammasta erilleen muista. 
Silloin Abimelek kysyi
häneltä: "Mitä tarkoittavat nuo seitsemän lammasta,
jotka olet pannut erilleen?" 
Abraham vastasi:
"Sinun tulee ottaa minulta vastaan nämä seitsemän
lammasta merkiksi siitä, että minä olen sen kaivon
kaivattanut." 
Tämän vuoksi paikka sai nimen
Beerseba, sillä siellä he vannoivat valan
toisilleen.
Kun he olivat tehneet liiton Beersebassa, Abimelek ja hänen
sotaväkensä päällikkö Pikol palasivat filistealaisten maahan.
Abraham istutti tamariskipuun Beersebaan ja rukoili siellä Herraa, ikuista
Jumalaa. 
Abraham asui kauan muukalaisena filistealaisten maassa.
Ks. selitystä jakeeseen. 
Nimi Beerseba merkitsee sekä 'valakaivo' että 'seitsenkaivo', vrt. 
Kun näistä tapahtumista oli kulunut jonkin aikaa,
Jumala tahtoi koetella Abrahamia ja sanoi hänelle:
"Abraham!" Abraham vastasi: "Tässä olen." 
Ja Jumala sanoi: "Ota mukaasi ainoa poikasi Iisak, jota
rakastat, lähde Morian maahan ja uhraa hänet siellä
polttouhriksi vuorella, jonka minä sinulle osoitan."
Aamulla heti noustuaan Abraham satuloi aasin ja
otti mukaansa kaksi palvelijaa sekä poikansa
Iisakin. Pilkottuaan puita polttouhria varten hän
lähti matkaan kohti paikkaa, jonne Jumala oli
käskenyt hänen mennä. 
Kolmantena päivänä Abraham
näki paikan etäältä. 
Silloin hän sanoi
palvelijoilleen: "Jääkää tänne ja pitäkää huolta
aasista, minä ja poika menemme tuonne rukoilemaan ja
palaamme sitten luoksenne." 
Abraham otti
polttouhripuut ja antoi ne Iisakin kannettavaksi;
hän itse otti tulen ja veitsen, ja sitten he
jatkoivat yhdessä matkaa. 
Iisak sanoi isälleen
Abrahamille: "Isä!" Ja Abraham sanoi: "Niin,
poikani?" Iisak sanoi: "Tässä on tuli ja puut, mutta
missä on karitsa polttouhriksi?" 
Abraham vastasi:
"Jumala katsoo kyllä itselleen karitsan
polttouhriksi, poikani." Sitten he jatkoivat yhdessä
matkaa.
Kun he tulivat paikkaan, jonka Jumala oli Abrahamille osoittanut,
Abraham rakensi sinne alttarin ja latoi puut paikoilleen. Sitten hän
sitoi poikansa Iisakin ja pani hänet alttarille puiden päälle.
Mutta kun Abraham tarttui veitseen uhratakseen
poikansa, 
Herran enkeli huusi hänelle taivaasta:
"Abraham, Abraham!" Abraham vastasi: "Tässä olen."
Herran enkeli sanoi: "Älä koske poikaan äläkä
tee hänelle mitään. Nyt minä tiedän, että sinä
pelkäät ja rakastat Jumalaa, kun et kieltäytynyt
uhraamasta edes ainoaa poikaasi." 
Ja kun Abraham
katsoi ympärilleen, hän huomasi oinaan, joka oli
sarvistaan takertunut pensaikkoon. Abraham kävi
hakemassa oinaan ja uhrasi sen polttouhriksi
poikansa sijasta. 
Abraham antoi sille paikalle
nimeksi "Herra katsoo". Niinpä vielä tänäkin päivänä
puhutaan "Herrankatsomavuoresta".
Herran enkeli huusi Abrahamille uudelleen
taivaasta: 
"Näin sanoo Herra: Koska sinä tämän
teit etkä kieltänyt minulta ainoaa poikaasi, minä
vannon itseni kautta, 
että siunaan sinua runsain
määrin ja annan sinulle jälkeläisiä niin paljon,
että he ovat kuin taivaan tähdet tai hiekanjyvät
meren rannalla, ja sinun jälkeläisesi valloittavat
vihollistensa kaupungit. 
Sinun jälkeläistesi
saama siunaus tulee siunaukseksi kaikille maailman
kansoille, koska sinä olit minun äänelleni kuuliainen."
Sitten Abraham palasi palvelijoiden luo, ja he
lähtivät yhdessä Beersebaan. Ja Abraham jäi asumaan
Beersebaan.
Näiden tapausten jälkeen Abraham sai tietää,
että Milka oli synnyttänyt poikia hänen veljelleen
Nahorille. 
Nämä olivat Us, esikoinen, tämän veli
Bus ja Kemuel, josta tuli aramealaisten kantaisä,
Kesed, Haso, Pildas, Jidlaf ja Betuel.
Betuelille syntyi Rebekka. Kahdeksan poikaa
synnytti Milka Nahorille, Abrahamin veljelle.
Myös Nahorin sivuvaimo, joka oli nimeltään
Reuma, synnytti lapsia. Nämä olivat Tebah, Gaham,
Tahas ja Maaka.
Judit Sananmukaisesti: Sinun siemenessäsi tulevat siunatuiksi kaikki maan kansat. 
Saara eli sadankahdenkymmenenseitsemän vuoden
ikäiseksi; se oli Saaran elinikä. 
Hän kuoli Kirjat-Arbassa eli Hebronissa, Kanaaninmaassa. Abraham
vietti siellä Saaran valittajaiset ja itki häntä.
Sitten Abraham nousi vainajan äärestä, meni
heettiläisten puheille ja sanoi: 
"Minä olen
muukalainen, vieras teidän parissanne. Antakaa
minulle maata oman sukuhaudan paikaksi, jotta saisin
kätkeä sinne vainajani." 
Heettiläiset vastasivat
Abrahamille: 
"Herra, sinä Jumalan ruhtinas meidän keskuudessamme! Sinä saat haudata
vainajasi parhaaseen hautaan, mikä meillä on. Kuka tahansa meistä
antaa sinun haudata vainajasi omaan sukuhautaansa."
Abraham kiitti seudun heettiläisiä asukkaita
kumartaen maahan saakka, 
mutta sanoi heille
vielä: "Jos kerran teille sopii, että minä hautaan
tänne vainajani, niin pyydän teitä puhumaan
Efronille, Soharin pojalle, minun puolestani,
että hän myisi minulle omistamansa Makpelan
luolan, joka on hänen tiluksiensa laidassa. Minä
haluan teidän läsnä ollessanne ostaa sen häneltä
täydestä hinnasta sukuhaudaksemme."
Efron oli istumassa muiden heettiläisten
joukossa kaupunginportin aukiolla, ja hän vastasi
Abrahamille kokousväen kuullen: 
"Kuuntele minua,
herrani! Minä lahjoitan sinulle koko vainion ja
luolan, joka siellä on. Minä annan sen sinulle
kaupunkini miesten nähden. Hautaa siis vainajasi!"
Silloin Abraham kumarsi syvään kaupungin
miehille 
ja sanoi Efronille kaikkien kuullen:
"Jospa kuitenkin kuuntelisit minua! Minä annan
sinulle maksun siitä vainiosta, myy se minulle, niin
hautaan sinne vainajani." 
Efron vastasi Abrahamille: 
"Kuuntele minua, herrani! Neljänsadan
hopeasekelin maapala -- mitäpä se meidän kesken
merkitsee! Hautaa vainajasi." 
Abraham ymmärsi
Efronin tarkoituksen ja punnitsi hänelle
hopeamäärän, jonka tämä oli heettiläisten kuullen
maininnut, neljäsataa sekeliä maksuna käypää hopeaa.
Niin siirtyivät Efronin vainio, joka oli
Makpelassa Mamren lähistöllä, siellä sijaitseva
luola sekä tällä alueella kasvavat puut
Abrahamin omistukseen heettiläisten, Efronin
kotikaupungin kaikkien miesten, ollessa todistajina.
Tämän jälkeen Abraham hautasi vaimonsa Saaran
Makpelan vainion luolaan, joka on Mamren eli
Hebronin lähistöllä Kanaaninmaassa. 
Vainio ja
siellä oleva luola siirtyivät näin heettiläisiltä
Abrahamille sukuhaudaksi.
Abraham oli tullut vanhaksi ja ikääntyneeksi, ja
Herra oli siunannut häntä kaikin tavoin. 
Abraham
sanoi nyt palvelijalleen, taloutensa vanhimmalle,
joka huolehti hänen koko omaisuudestaan: "Kosketa
minua nivusiin 
ja vanno minulle Herran, taivaan
ja maan Jumalan kautta, ettet ota minun pojalleni
vaimoa kanaanilaisten naapureitteni tyttäristä
vaan menet synnyinmaahani, sukuni luo, ja tuot
sieltä vaimon pojalleni Iisakille." 
Palvelija
kysyi häneltä: "Entä jos tyttö ei haluakaan lähteä
minun mukaani tänne? Onko minun silloin vietävä
poikasi siihen maahan, josta olet lähtenyt?"
Abraham sanoi hänelle: "Älä missään tapauksessa
vie poikaani sinne. 
Herra, taivaan Jumala, joka
vei minut sukuni parista ja syntymämaastani ja
vannoi antavansa minun jälkeläisilleni tämän maan,
lähettää enkelinsä sinun edelläsi, niin että
onnistut noutamaan sieltä vaimon pojalleni. 
Ellei
tyttö halua lähteä mukaasi, olet vapaa valastasi,
mutta poikaani älä sinne vie." 
Ja palvelija
kosketti isäntäänsä Abrahamia nivusiin ja vannoi
vaaditun valan.
Palvelija otti isäntänsä laumasta kymmenen kamelia sekä kaikenlaisia
kalleuksia hänen tavaroistaan ja lähti Mesopotamiaan, Nahorin
kaupunkiin.
Siellä hän pysähtyi kameleineen kaupungin
ulkopuolelle kaivon luo. Oli ilta, se aika, jolloin
kaupungin naiset tulevat kaivolle vettä noutamaan.
Palvelija rukoili: "Herra, minun isäntäni
Abrahamin Jumala! Osoita hyvyytesi isännälleni
Abrahamille ja anna tapahtua näin: 
Kun minä
seison kaivon luona ja kaupunkilaisten tyttäret
tulevat hakemaan vettä, 
niin minä sanon yhdelle
tytöistä: 'Kallistaisitko ruukkua, että saan juoda.'
Jos hän silloin sanoo: 'Juo! Minä juotan
kamelisikin', niin hän on juuri se, jonka olet
tarkoittanut palvelijallesi Iisakille. Siitä minä
tiedän, että olet osoittanut hyvyytesi isännälleni."
Tuskin hän oli ehtinyt tämän lausua, kun
kaivolle tuli Rebekka, Betuelin tytär, ruukku
olkapäällään. Betuel oli Abrahamin veljen Nahorin ja
tämän vaimon Milkan poika. 
Tyttö oli hyvin
kaunis, neitsyt, johon mies ei ollut koskenut. Hän
laskeutui portaita lähteelle, täytti ruukkunsa ja
nousi sieltä ylös. 
Silloin palvelija riensi
häntä vastaan ja sanoi: "Anna minun juoda hiukan
vettä ruukustasi." 
Tyttö sanoi: "Juo, herrani",
laski ruukun heti kätensä varaan ja antoi hänen
juoda. 
Kun palvelija oli juonut kyllikseen,
tyttö sanoi: "Minä haen myös sinun kameleillesi
vettä niin paljon kuin ne juovat." 
Hän tyhjensi
nopeasti ruukkunsa juottoaltaaseen, juoksi sitten
uudelleen vettä hakemaan ja kantoi sitä miehen
kaikille kameleille. 
Mies tarkkaili häntä mitään
puhumatta nähdäkseen, oliko Herra antanut hänen
matkansa onnistua.
Kun kamelit olivat saaneet juodakseen, mies otti
esiin puoli sekeliä painavan kultaisen nenärenkaan,
antoi sen tytölle ja pujotti hänen käsiinsä kaksi
kultaista rannerengasta, jotka painoivat kymmenen
sekeliä. 
Sitten hän sanoi: "Kerrohan, kenen
tytär sinä olet. Onko isäsi talossa meille tilaa
yöpyä?" 
Tyttö vastasi hänelle: "Isäni on Betuel,
Milkan ja Nahorin poika." 
Ja hän sanoi vielä:
"Meillä on olkia ja rehua yllin kyllin ja myös tilaa
yöpymiseen." 
Mies lankesi polvilleen, kumarsi
maahan asti kiittäen Herraa 
ja sanoi: "Kiitetty
olkoon Herra, isäntäni Abrahamin Jumala, joka on
ollut hyvä ja uskollinen isännälleni ja ohjannut
minut matkallani isäntäni veljen taloon!"
Tyttö juoksi kotiin äitinsä luo kertomaan, mitä
oli tapahtunut. 
Rebekalla oli veli nimeltä
Laban, ja tämä riensi kaupungista lähteelle miehen
luo, 
kun oli nähnyt sisarellaan nenärenkaan sekä
rannerenkaat ja kuullut, mitä Rebekka kertoi miehen
hänelle sanoneen. Laban tavoitti miehen, joka vielä
seisoi lähteellä kameleineen, 
ja sanoi hänelle:
"Ole tervetullut, sinä Herran siunaama! Miksi jäisit
tänne ulos, kun minä olen jo tehnyt tilaa taloon ja
varannut paikan kameleille?" 
Niin mies meni taloon ja riisui kamelit, ja Laban toi kameleille
olkia ja rehua ja palvelijalle sekä hänen seuralaisilleen vettä jalkojen pesua varten. 
Mutta kun
palvelijan eteen pantiin syötävää, hän sanoi: "Minä
en syö, ennen kuin olen kertonut asiani." Laban
sanoi: "Puhu!"
Mies sanoi:
"Minä olen Abrahamin palvelija. 
Herra on
suuresti siunannut isäntääni, tehnyt hänet rikkaaksi
ja antanut hänelle lampaita, vuohia ja nautakarjaa,
kultaa ja hopeaa, orjia ja orjattaria, kameleita ja
aaseja. 
Saara, minun isäntäni vaimo, on vanhoilla päivillään synnyttänyt isännälleni pojan, ja
isäntäni on antanut tälle pojalle koko omaisuutensa.
Mutta isäntäni vannotti minua sanoen: 'Älä ota
minun pojalleni vaimoa kanaanilaisten naapureitteni
tyttäristä, 
vaan mene isäni kotiin ja sukuni luo
ja tuo sieltä pojalleni vaimo.' 
Minä sanoin
isännälleni: 'Entä jos tyttö ei lähde mukaani?'
Hän sanoi minulle: 'Herra, jonka tahdon
mukaisesti minä olen vaeltanut, lähettää enkelinsä
sinun mukaasi ja antaa matkasi onnistua, niin että
löydät pojalleni vaimon minun suvustani ja isäni
perheestä. 
Olet vapaa valastasi vain, jos tulet
sukuni luo eikä sinun mukaasi anneta ketään. Vasta
silloin olet vapaa minulle vannomastasi valasta.'
"Kun tänään tulin lähteelle, minä sanoin: Herra,
isäntäni Abrahamin Jumala! Jos tahdot antaa minun
onnistua tällä matkallani, niin anna käydä näin:
Kun minä nyt seison lähteellä ja tänne tulee
nuori nainen hakemaan vettä, minä sanon hänelle:
'Anna minun juoda vähän vettä ruukustasi.' 
Jos
hän silloin sanoo minulle: 'Juo, minä tuon vettä
kameleillesikin', niin hän on se nainen, jonka Herra
on tarkoittanut isäntäni pojalle.
"Tuskin olin ehtinyt sanoa mielessäni näin, kun
Rebekka tuli kaupungista ruukku olkapäällään ja
laskeutui nostamaan vettä. Minä sanoin hänelle:
'Anna minun juoda.' 
Hän laski heti ruukun alas
ja sanoi: 'Juo vain, minä juotan kamelisikin.' Ja
minä join, ja hän juotti myös kamelini. 
Minä kysyin häneltä: 'Kenen tytär sinä olet?' Hän vastasi: 'Isäni on
Betuel, Milkan ja Nahorin poika.'  Silloin minä panin nenärenkaan
hänen nenäänsä ja rannerenkaat hänen käsiinsä,
lankesin polvilleni
ja kumarsin maahan asti kiittäen ja ylistäen Herraa,
isäntäni Abrahamin Jumalaa, joka oli ohjannut minut
noutamaan isäntäni veljen tyttären hänen pojalleen
vaimoksi. 
Ja nyt, jos haluatte osoittaa hyvyyttä
ja sukurakkautta isäntääni kohtaan, niin sanokaa se
minulle, mutta ellette halua, kertokaa minulle
sekin, niin että tiedän, miten minun tulee toimia."
Laban ja Betuel vastasivat: "Tämä asia on
Herrasta lähtöisin, me emme voi sanoa mitään sen
puolesta tai sitä vastaan. 
Tässä on Rebekka, ota
hänet mukaasi. Tulkoon hänestä isäntäsi pojan vaimo,
niin kuin Herra on määrännyt." 
Kuultuaan heidän
sanansa Abrahamin palvelija lankesi maahan ja kiitti
Herraa. 
Sitten hän otti esiin hopeaja
kultaesineitä sekä vaatteita ja antoi ne Rebekalle.
Myös hänen veljelleen ja äidilleen hän antoi
kallisarvoisia lahjoja. 
Sitten hän ja hänen
seuralaisensa aterioivat, ja he jäivät taloon yöksi.
Heti seuraavana aamuna palvelija sanoi: "Sallikaa
minun nyt palata isäntäni luo."
Tytön veli ja äiti sanoivat: "Anna tytön viipyä
meidän luonamme vielä jonkin aikaa, edes kymmenen
päivää. Sitten hän voi lähteä." 
Mutta palvelija
sanoi heille: "Älkää viivyttäkö minua. Herra on
antanut matkani onnistua, päästäkää minut palaamaan
isäntäni luo." 
He sanoivat: "Kutsutaan tyttö
tänne ja kysytään, mitä mieltä hän on." 
He kutsuivat Rebekan paikalle ja kysyivät häneltä: "Tahdotko nyt heti
lähteä tämän miehen mukaan?" Hän vastasi: "Tahdon."
Niin he saattoivat matkaan
Rebekan ja hänen imettäjänsä sekä Abrahamin palvelijan ja tämän miehet. 
He siunasivat Rebekan ja
sanoivat hänelle:
-- Tulkoon sinulle, sisaremme,
tuhat kertaa kymmenentuhatta jälkeläistä,
ja jälkeläisesi ottakoot omakseen
vihollistensa kaupungit.
Sitten Rebekka ja hänen palvelijattarensa nousivat kamelin selkään ja
lähtivät matkaan. Näin palvelija vei Rebekan mukanaan.
Iisak oli tällä välin siirtynyt Lahai-Roin
kaivon tienoille; hän näet asui Negevin maassa.
Eräänä iltana Iisak lähti kävelemään, ja kun hän
kohotti katseensa, hän näki kamelikaravaanin
lähestyvän. 
Kun Rebekka puolestaan näki Iisakin,
hän pudottautui kamelinsa selästä 
ja kysyi
palvelijalta: "Kuka on tuo mies, joka tulee tuolta
meitä vastaan?" Palvelija vastasi: "Hän on minun
isäntäni." Silloin Rebekka otti huivin ja peitti
kasvonsa. 
Palvelija kertoi Iisakille kaiken,
mitä oli tapahtunut. 
Iisak vei Rebekan äitinsä
Saaran telttaan ja otti hänet vaimokseen. Iisak
rakasti häntä ja sai lohdun äitinsä kuoleman
tuottamaan suruun.
Abraham otti vielä uuden vaimon, jonka nimi oli
Ketura. 
Hän synnytti Abrahamille Simranin, Joksanin, Medanin, Midianin, Jisbakin ja Suahin. 
Joksanille syntyivät Saba ja Dedan. Dedanista polveutuvat
assurilaiset, letusilaiset ja leummilaiset.
Midianin pojat olivat Efa, Efer, Henok, Abida ja
Eldaa. Nämä kaikki olivat Keturan jälkeläisiä.
Abraham antoi koko omaisuutensa Iisakille.
Sivuvaimojensa pojille hän antoi lahjoja, ja hän
lähetti heidät vielä eläessään itään Kedemin maahan,
pois poikansa Iisakin tieltä.
Abraham eli kaikkiaan sataseitsemänkymmentäviisi
vuotta. 
Sitten hän kuoli rauhallisen vanhuuden
jälkeen korkeassa iässä ja elämästä kyllänsä saaneena, ja hänet otettiin isiensä luo. 
Hänen poikansa
Iisak ja Ismael hautasivat hänet Makpelan luolaan,
joka sijaitsi heettiläisen Efronin, Soharin pojan,
vainiolla Mamresta itään. 
Tämän vainion Abraham
oli ostanut heettiläisiltä, ja sinne on haudattu
Abraham ja hänen vaimonsa Saara. 
Abrahamin kuoltua Jumalan siunaus seurasi hänen poikaansa Iisakia.
Iisak jäi asumaan Lahai-Roin kaivon tienoille.
Tässä on Abrahamin pojan Ismaelin sukuluettelo,
hänen, jonka Saaran egyptiläinen orjatar Hagar
synnytti Abrahamille. 
Nämä olivat Ismaelin pojat
ikäjärjestyksessä lueteltuina: Ismaelin esikoinen
oli Nebajot, ja hänen muut poikansa olivat Kedar,
Adbeel, Mibsam, 
Misma, Duma, Massa, 
Hadad,
Tema, Jetur, Nafis ja Kedma. 
Nämä olivat
Ismaelin pojat, kahdentoista heimokunnan päälliköt,
ja heidän mukaansa annettiin nimet myös heidän
kylilleen ja leiripaikoilleen.
Ismael eli kaikkiaan satakolmekymmentäseitsemän
vuotta. Sitten hän kuoli ja hänet otettiin isiensä
luo. 
Ismaelin suvun asuma-alue ulottui Havilasta aina Suriin, joka on
Egyptistä itään Assurin suunnalla. Ja Ismael joutui alinomaa
vastakkain veljiensä kanssa.
Tämä on kertomus Abrahamin pojan Iisakin
suvusta. Abrahamille syntyi Iisak. 
Iisak oli
nelikymmenvuotias ottaessaan vaimokseen Rebekan,
joka oli Mesopotamiassa asuvan aramealaisen Betuelin
tytär ja Labanin sisar. 
Iisak rukoili Herraa
vaimonsa puolesta, sillä tämä oli hedelmätön. Herra
kuuli hänen rukouksensa, ja Rebekka tuli raskaaksi.
Mutta lapset potkivat toisiaan Rebekan kohdussa,
ja hän sanoi: "Miksi minulle pitää sattua
tällaista?" Hän meni kysymään neuvoa Herralta,
ja Herra sanoi:
-- Kaksi kansaa on kohdussasi,
kaksi heimoa sinusta haarautuu.
Toinen heimo on toista vahvempi,
vanhempi on palveleva nuorempaa.
Aikanaan Rebekka synnytti kaksoset.
Ensimmäisenä syntynyt oli iholtaan punaruskea ja
kauttaaltaan karvainen kuin vuohenkarvaviitta, ja
hän sai nimen Esau. 
Sitten syntyi hänen
veljensä, ja hän piti kädellään kiinni Esaun
kantapäästä; siksi hän sai nimen Jaakob. Iisak oli
heidän syntyessään kuusikymmenvuotias.
Kun pojat varttuivat, Esausta tuli taitava
metsästäjä ja erämies, mutta Jaakob oli rauhallinen
ja viihtyi kotosalla. 
Koska Iisak söi mielellään
riistaa, hän rakasti enemmän Esauta, mutta Rebekalle
oli Jaakob rakkaampi.
Kerran, kun Jaakob valmisti keittoa, Esau tuli
väsyneenä metsästysretkeltään 
ja sanoi Jaakobille: "Anna vähän tuota ruskeaa, tuota ruskeaa keittoa,
minä olen ihan lopussa." Tästä syystä hän sai nimen Edom. 
Mutta Jaakob sanoi: "Myy minulle
ensin esikoisuutesi." 
Esau sanoi: "Minä varmaan
kohta kuolen. Mitä hyötyä minulle on esikoisuudesta?" 
Jaakob sanoi: "Vanno minulle ensin." Niin
Esau vannoi ja myi Jaakobille esikoisuutensa.
Sitten Jaakob antoi hänelle leipää ja papukeittoa, ja Esau söi ja joi,
nousi ja meni tiehensä.  Niin vähäarvoisena hän piti esikoisuuttaan.
Nimi Esau merkitsee 'karvainen', ja hänen myöhemmän
asuinpaikkansa Seirin nimi viittaa sekin 'karvaiseen'. Häntä kutsutaan
myös Edomiksi eli 'punaiseksi' tai 'ruskeaksi'. 
Nimi Jaakob muistuttaa sekä heprean sanaa aqeb 'kantapää' että sanaa aqab 'hän pettää'. 
Ks. selitystä jakeeseen . 
Maahan tuli nälänhätä, toinen kuin Abrahamin
aikaan sattunut. Silloin Iisak lähti filistealaisten
kuninkaan Abimelekin luo Gerariin. 
Herra ilmestyi
Iisakille ja sanoi: "Älä lähde Egyptiin, vaan pysy
sillä seudulla, jonka minä sinulle osoitan. 
Jää
asumaan tähän maahan, niin minä olen sinun kanssasi
ja siunaan sinua. Sinulle ja sinun jälkeläisillesi
minä annan kaikki nämä seudut ja pidän näin voimassa
sen valan, jonka vannoin isällesi Abrahamille.
Minä annan sinulle jälkeläisiä niin paljon, että
he ovat kuin taivaan tähdet, ja annan heille koko
tämän maan. Sinun jälkeläistesi saama siunaus tulee
siunaukseksi kaikille maailman kansoille, 
koska
Abraham oli minun äänelleni kuuliainen ja noudatti
sitä, mihin minä hänet velvoitin. Hän piti minun
käskyni, määräykseni ja lakini." 
Niin Iisak jäi
asumaan Gerariin.
Kun Gerarin asukkaat kyselivät, kuka Rebekka oli, Iisak sanoi: "Hän on
minun sisareni." Hän ei uskaltanut sanoa, että Rebekka oli hänen
vaimonsa, koska pelkäsi seudun miesten tappavan hänet Rebekan takia,
joka oli hyvin kaunis.
Iisak oli asunut siellä
jonkin aikaa, kun filistealaisten kuningas Abimelek
kerran näki ikkunastaan hänen hyväilevän Rebekkaa.
Silloin Abimelek kutsutti Iisakin luokseen ja
sanoi: "Hänhän onkin sinun vaimosi! Miten saatoit
sanoa häntä sisareksesi?" Iisak vastasi hänelle:
"Sanoin niin, koska pelkäsin, että minut
surmattaisiin hänen vuokseen." 
Abimelek sanoi:
"Mitä oletkaan tehnyt meille! Se vielä olisi
puuttunut, että joku meikäläisistä olisi maannut
sinun vaimosi kanssa! Silloin sinä olisit syössyt
meidät raskaaseen syntiin." 
Ja Abimelek ilmoitti
koko kansalleen: "Joka kajoaa tähän mieheen tai
hänen vaimoonsa, on kuoleman oma."
Eräänä vuonna Iisak sai siinä maassa kylvöstään
satakertaisen sadon. Herra siunasi häntä. 
Hän
vaurastui vaurastumistaan ja oli lopulta hyvin
rikas. 
Koska hänelle oli karttunut lampaita,
vuohia ja nautakarjaa sekä paljon palvelusväkeä,
filistealaiset alkoivat kadehtia häntä. 
Niin
filistealaiset tukkivat ja täyttivät hiekalla kaikki
ne kaivot, jotka hänen isänsä Abrahamin palvelijat
olivat aikoinaan kaivaneet. 
Sitten Abimelek
sanoi Iisakille: "Lähde pois meidän luotamme,
sinusta on tullut aivan liian mahtava."
Iisak lähti sieltä, pystytti telttansa Gerarin
joenuoman varrelle ja jäi sinne asumaan. 
Hän kaivatti uudelleen auki isänsä Abrahamin päivinä kaivetut kaivot,
jotka filistealaiset olivat Abrahamin kuoleman jälkeen tukkineet, ja
antoi niille samat nimet kuin hänen isänsä oli antanut.
Iisakin palvelijat alkoivat sitten kaivaa kaivoa
joenuomaan ja löysivät vesisuonen. 
Mutta Gerarin
paimenet rupesivat riitelemään Iisakin paimenien
kanssa ja sanoivat: "Vesi kuuluu meille." Niin kaivo
sai nimen Esek, koska siitä oli tullut kiistaa.
Iisakin palvelijat kaivoivat vielä toisen kaivon
ja joutuivat riitaan siitäkin, ja sille hän antoi
nimen Sitna. 
Sitten hän siirtyi sieltä pois ja
kaivatti vielä uuden kaivon, eikä siitä enää
syntynyt riitaa. Sen nimeksi tuli Rehobot, sillä
Iisak sanoi: "Nyt Herra on antanut meille väljästi
tilaa, niin että voimme levitä laajalle tässä maassa."
Gerarin seudulta Iisak siirtyi Beersebaan.
Ensimmäisenä yönä Herra ilmestyi hänelle ja
sanoi: "Minä olen sinun isäsi Abrahamin Jumala. Älä
pelkää, minä olen sinun kanssasi. Palvelijani
Abrahamin tähden minä siunaan sinua ja teen suureksi
sinun jälkeläistesi määrän." 
Iisak rakensi sinne
alttarin ja rukoili Herraa. Hän pystytti sinne
telttansa, ja hänen palvelijansa kaivoivat kaivon.
Abimelek tuli Gerarista Iisakin luo mukanaan
lähin miehensä Ahussat ja sotaväen päällikkö Pikol.
Iisak kysyi heiltä: "Minkä takia te nyt tulitte
minun luokseni, vaikka vihaatte minua ja hääditte
minut luotanne?" 
He vastasivat: "Me olemme nähneet, että Herra on sinun kanssasi. Siksi
ajattelimme, että sinun ja meidän välillämme tulisi olla valalla
vahvistettu sopimus. Me haluamme tehdä liiton sinun kanssasi,
ettet tekisi meille mitään
pahaa. Emme mekään ole tehneet sinulle pahaa vaan
pelkkää hyvää ja olemme päästäneet sinut rauhassa
menemään. Sinulla on Herran siunaus." 
Silloin
Iisak järjesti heille pidot, ja he söivät ja joivat.
Heti seuraavana aamuna he vannoivat valan
toisilleen. Sitten Iisak hyvästeli heidät, ja he
erosivat hyvässä sovussa.
Samana päivänä tulivat Iisakin palvelijat kertomaan hänelle kaivosta,
jota olivat olleet kaivamassa, ja sanoivat: "Me löysimme vettä."
Hän antoi
sille kaivolle nimen Sibea.
Sen tähden siellä sijaitsevan kaupungin nimi on vielä tänäkin päivänä
Beerseba.
Kun Esau oli nelikymmenvuotias, hän otti
vaimoikseen Beerin tyttären Jehuditin ja Elonin
tyttären Basematin, jotka olivat heettiläisiä.
Nämä naiset tuottivat Iisakille ja Rebekalle
paljon mielipahaa.
Nimi Esek merkitsee 'kiista'. 
Nimi Sitna merkitsee 'riita'. 
Nimi Rehobot merkitsee 'väljyys'. 
Nimi Sibea merkitsee 'vala', 'seitsemän', vrt.
Kun Iisak oli tullut vanhaksi ja hänen silmänsä
olivat hämärtyneet, niin ettei hän enää nähnyt, hän
kutsui luokseen vanhemman poikansa Esaun ja sanoi
hänelle: "Poikani!" Esau vastasi: "Mitä, isä?"
Iisak sanoi: "Minä olen tullut vanhaksi ja saatan
pian kuolla. 
Ota nyt varusteesi, nuoliviinesi ja
jousesi, ja lähde metsästämään minulle riistaa.
Laita siitä herkkuruokaa, sellaista josta minä
pidän, ja tuo sitä minulle syötäväksi, jotta voisin
siunata sinut ennen kuin kuolen."
Mutta Rebekka kuunteli, kun Iisak puhui pojalleen
Esaulle. Kun Esau oli lähtenyt metsästämään riistaa
isäänsä varten, 
Rebekka sanoi pojalleen Jaakobille: "Minä kuulin äsken, että isäsi sanoi veljellesi
Esaulle: 
'Tuo minulle riistaa ja valmista minulle
herkkuruokaa, jotta voisin siunata sinut Herran
nimessä ennen kuin kuolen.' 
Nyt, poikani, tottele
minua ja tee niin kuin minä käsken. 
Hae minulle
laumasta kaksi hyvää nuorta vuohta, niin minä teen
niistä isäsi mieliruokaa. 
Vie sinä se isällesi
syötäväksi, että hän siunaisi sinut ennen kuolemaansa."
Jaakob sanoi silloin äidilleen: "Mutta veljeni
Esau on karvainen ja minun ihoni on sileä. 
Entä
jos isä tunnustelee minua? Silloin hän pitää minua
petkuttajana, ja minä saan osakseni kirouksen enkä
siunausta." 
Hänen äitinsä sanoi: "Jos niin käy,
poikani, kohdatkoon se kirous minua. Tee nyt vain
niin kuin minä sanon ja mene hakemaan ne vuohet."
Jaakob haki vuohet äidilleen, ja tämä valmisti
niistä Iisakin mieliruokaa. 
Sitten Rebekka otti
vanhemman poikansa Esaun parhaat vaatteet, jotka
hänellä oli teltassa, ja puki nuoremman poikansa
Jaakobin niihin. 
Vuohien nahoilla hän peitti
Jaakobin kädet sekä hänen paljaan kaulansa ja niskansa. 
Sitten hän antoi herkut ja leipomansa
leivän Jaakobin käteen.
Jaakob meni isänsä luo ja sanoi: "Isä!" Iisak
vastasi: "Niin, poika, kuka sinä olet?" 
Jaakob
sanoi isälleen: "Minä olen sinun esikoisesi Esau.
Olen tehnyt niin kuin käskit. Nouse istumaan ja syö
minun riistaani, ja siunaa sitten minut." 
Iisak
kysyi: "Miten löysit saaliin näin pian, poikani?"
Jaakob vastasi: "Herra, sinun Jumalasi, johdatti sen
tielleni." 
Iisak sanoi: "Tulehan lähemmäksi,
poikani, niin minä tunnustelen, oletko sinä Esau vai
et." 
Jaakob meni isänsä luo, ja tämä tunnusteli
häntä ja sanoi: "Ääni on Jaakobin ääni, mutta kädet
ovat Esaun kädet." 
Eikä Iisak tuntenut Jaakobia,
sillä tämän kädet olivat karvaiset kuten Esaun, ja
hän siunasi Jaakobin. 
Iisak kysyi vielä: "Oletko
sinä todella poikani Esau?" Jaakob vastasi: "Olen."
Silloin Iisak sanoi: "Tuo ruoka tänne, niin että saan syödä poikani
tuomaa riistaa. Sen jälkeen siunaan sinut." Jaakob tarjosi hänelle
ruokaa ja viiniä, ja hän söi ja joi.
Sitten Iisak sanoi:
"Tule tänne ja suutele minua, poikani." 
Jaakob
meni hänen luokseen ja suuteli häntä, ja Iisak tunsi
hänen vaatteidensa hajun ja siunasi hänet sanoen:
-- Poikani tuoksu on kuin maan tuoksu,
maan, jonka Herra on siunannut.
Jumala suokoon sinulle taivaan kastetta
ja maan rehevyyttä,
viljaa ja viiniä runsain määrin.
Kansat palvelkoot sinua
ja kansakunnat kumartakoot sinua.
Ole veljiesi herra,
ja äitisi pojat kumartakoot sinua.
Kirottuja olkoot ne, jotka sinua kiroavat,
ja siunattuja ne, jotka sinua siunaavat.
Iisak oli ehtinyt siunata Jaakobin ja Jaakob oli
juuri lähtenyt isänsä luota, kun Esau palasi metsästämästä. 
Hänkin laittoi herkkuruokaa, vei sen
isälleen ja sanoi hänelle: "Nouse, isä, syömään
poikasi tuomaa riistaa, että sitten voisit siunata
minut." 
Hänen isänsä Iisak kysyi: "Kuka sinä
olet?" Esau vastasi: "Minä olen poikasi Esau, sinun
esikoisesi." 
Silloin Iisak säikähti kovin ja
kysyi: "Kuka se sitten oli, joka kävi metsästämässä
ja toi minulle riistaa? Minä söin jo ennen sinun
tuloasi ja siunasin hänet, ja se siunaus pysyy."
Kun Esau kuuli isänsä sanat, hän alkoi
äänekkäästi itkeä ja valittaa ja sanoi isälleen:
"Siunaa minutkin, isä!" 
Silloin Iisak sanoi:
"Veljesi tuli kavalasti ja vei sinulta siunauksen."
Esau sanoi: "Ei häntä suotta Jaakobiksi sanota.
Hän on pettänyt minut kahteen kertaan: hän vei jo
esikoisuuteni, ja nyt hän riisti minulta
siunauksenkin!" Esau kysyi vielä: "Eikö sinulle
jäänyt mitään siunausta minua varten?" 
Iisak
vastasi: "Minä asetin hänet sinun herraksesi, annoin
hänelle palvelijoiksi kaikki hänen veljensä ja
varustin hänet viljalla ja viinillä. Mitä minä
voisin enää tehdä sinun hyväksesi, poikani?"
Silloin Esau sanoi isälleen: "Yksikö siunaus
sinulla vain on, isä? Siunaa, isä, minutkin!" Ja
Esau itki katkerasti. 
Hänen isänsä Iisak sanoi
hänelle:
-- Kaukana on sinun asuinsijasi oleva
rehevistä maista,
vailla taivaan kastetta.
Sinä olet elävä miekkasi varassa
ja palveleva veljeäsi.
Mutta kun sinä kerran riistäydyt irti,
silloin karistat hänen ikeensä niskastasi.
Esau kantoi Jaakobille kaunaa siitä, että Jaakob
oli saanut isän siunauksen, ja hän ajatteli: "Pian
tulee aika, jolloin suremme isän kuolemaa. Sitten
minä tapan Jaakobin." 
Kun Rebekalle kerrottiin, mitä hänen vanhempi poikansa aikoi, hän
haetti luokseen nuoremman poikansa Jaakobin ja sanoi hänelle: "Veljesi
Esau hautoo kostoa ja aikoo tappaa sinut.
Tee siis, poikani, niin kuin minä neuvon: lähde
pois ja pakene veljeni Labanin luo Harraniin.
Viivy siellä jonkin aikaa, kunnes veljesi kiukku
haihtuu. 
Kun veljesi viha on asettunut ja hän on
unohtanut, mitä sinä hänelle teit, minä lähetän
sinulle sanan ja haetan sinut sieltä. Miksi minun
pitäisi menettää teidät molemmat yhtenä ja samana
päivänä?"
Iisakille Rebekka sanoi: "Minä olen kuollakseni
kyllästynyt noihin heettiläisnaisiin! Jos Jaakobkin
vielä ottaa tästä maasta heettiläisen vaimon, jonkun
samanlaisen kuin nuo, niin mitä minun enää kannattaa
elää?"
Ks. selitystä jakeeseen .
Niin Iisak kutsui luokseen Jaakobin, siunasi
häntä ja sanoi: "Älä sinä ota vaimoksesi
kanaanilaista naista. 
Lähde Mesopotamiaan äitisi
isän Betuelin kotiin ja ota sieltä itsellesi vaimo
enosi Labanin tyttäristä. 
Jumala, Kaikkivaltias,
siunatkoon sinua ja tehköön sinut hedelmälliseksi ja
jälkeläisesi monilukuisiksi, niin että sinusta saa
alkunsa suuri kansa. 
Hän antakoon sinulle
samanlaisen siunauksen kuin Abrahamille, sekä
sinulle että jälkeläisillesi, niin että saat
omaksesi tämän maan, jonka Jumala lupasi Abrahamille
ja jossa nyt asut muukalaisena." 
Sitten Iisak lähetti Jaakobin matkaan, ja Jaakob lähti Mesopotamiaan
aramealaisen Labanin luo, joka oli Betuelin poika ja Jaakobin ja Esaun
eno.
Esau sai tietää, että Iisak oli siunannut
Jaakobin ja lähettänyt hänet Mesopotamiaan ottamaan
sieltä itselleen vaimon ja että Iisak Jaakobia
siunatessaan oli kieltänyt häntä ottamasta
vaimokseen kanaanilaista naista. 
Jaakob totteli
isäänsä ja äitiään ja lähti Mesopotamiaan. 
Nyt
Esau ymmärsi, ettei hänen isänsä sietänyt
kanaanilaisnaisia, 
ja hän meni Abrahamin pojan
Ismaelin luo ja otti vaimokseen entisten lisäksi
Ismaelin tyttären Mahalatin, joka oli Nebajotin
sisar.
Jaakob lähti Beersebasta ja kulki kohti
Harrania. 
Matkallaan hän jäi auringon laskiessa
yöksi erääseen paikkaan, otti siltä paikalta
päänalusekseen kiven ja kävi makuulle.
Yöllä Jaakob näki unessa portaat, jotka ulottuivat maasta taivaaseen,
ja Jumalan enkelit kulkivat niitä ylös ja alas.
Sitten hän näki, että Herra
seisoi hänen vieressään ja sanoi: "Minä olen Herra,
isäsi Abrahamin Jumala ja Iisakin Jumala. Tämän
maan, jolla sinä makaat, minä annan sinulle ja sinun
jälkeläisillesi. 
Sinun jälkeläisesi tulevat lukuisiksi kuin maan tomuhiukkaset, ja sinun sukusi
levittäytyy länteen ja itään, pohjoiseen ja etelään.
Sinun ja sinun jälkeläistesi saama siunaus tulee
siunaukseksi kaikille maailman kansoille. 
Minä
olen sinun kanssasi ja varjelen sinua, minne ikinä
menetkin, ja tuon sinut takaisin tähän maahan. Minä
en hylkää sinua, vaan täytän sen, minkä nyt olen
sinulle luvannut."
Jaakob heräsi unestaan ja sanoi: "Herra on totisesti tässä paikassa, enkä minä tiennyt sitä."
Pelko valtasi hänet, ja hän sanoi: "Kuinka
pelottavan pyhä tämä paikka onkaan! Tämä on varmaan
Jumalan asuinsija ja itse taivaan portti."
Aamun valjettua Jaakob otti kiven, joka hänellä
oli ollut päänalusenaan, pystytti sen patsaaksi ja
vuodatti sen päälle öljyä. 
Hän antoi paikalle nimen Betel; sitä ennen kaupungin nimi oli ollut
Lus.
Jaakob teki uhrilupauksen ja sanoi: "Jos
Herra on minun kanssani ja varjelee minua tällä
matkallani ja antaa minulle leipää syötäväksi ja
vaatteita verhokseni 
ja jos minä saan palata
turvallisesti isäni ja sukuni luo, on Herra oleva
minun Jumalani. 
Tästä paikasta, johon minä kiven
pystytin, on tuleva Jumalan pyhäkkö. Kaikesta, mitä
sinä annat minulle, minä tuon sinulle kymmenykset."
Nimi Betel merkitsee 'Jumalan asuinsija', 'pyhäkkö'. 
Sitten Jaakob lähti matkaan kohti idän kansojen
maita. 
Saapuessaan sinne hän huomasi kaivon ja
kolme lammaslaumaa makailemassa sen äärellä, sillä
siitä kaivosta juotettiin karjalaumoja. Kaivon suulla oli iso kivi, 
ja vasta kun kaikki paimenet olivat kokoontuneet sinne laumoineen,
kivi vieritettiin kaivon suulta ja lampaat ja vuohet juotettiin.
Sitten kivi pantiin taas paikoilleen kaivon suulle.
Jaakob kysyi paimenilta: "Mistä te olette kotoisin, veljet?" He
vastasivat: "Harranista."
Jaakob
kysyi vielä: "Tunnetteko Labanin, Nahorin pojan?" He
vastasivat: "Kyllä tunnemme." 
Hän kysyi: "Mitä
Labanille kuuluu?" Ja he vastasivat: "Hyvää hänelle
kuuluu, ja tuolta onkin tulossa hänen tyttärensä
Raakel lampaineen." 
Jaakob sanoi: "Nyt on vielä
täysi päivä ja liian varhaista ajaa karjaa kokoon.
Juottakaa vain lampaat ja viekää ne takaisin laitumelle." 
Mutta he sanoivat: "Ei, sitä me emme voi
tehdä, ennen kuin kaikki laumat ovat koossa ja kivi
vieritetään kaivon suulta. Vasta sitten me voimme
juottaa lampaat."
Jaakobin vielä puhuessa heidän kanssaan Raakel
toi sinne isänsä lammaslauman; sen paimentaminen oli
näet hänen tehtävänsä. 
Kun Jaakob näki Raakelin,
enonsa Labanin tyttären, ja hänen lampaansa, hän
astui esiin, vieritti kiven kaivon suulta ja juotti
lampaat. 
Sitten Jaakob suuteli Raakelia ja
puhkesi itkuun. 
Hän kertoi Raakelille olevansa
hänen isänsä sukua, Rebekan poika, ja Raakel juoksi
kertomaan isälleen. 
Kun Laban sai kuulla
sisarenpoikansa tulosta, hän riensi Jaakobia
vastaan, syleili ja suuteli häntä ja vei hänet
kotiinsa. Jaakob kertoi Labanille kaiken, mitä
hänelle oli tapahtunut, 
ja Laban sanoi hänelle:
"Sinä olet todellakin samaa luuta ja lihaa kuin
minä."
Kun Jaakob oli asunut Labanin luona kuukauden
verran, 
Laban sanoi Jaakobille: "Miksi sinun
pitäisi tehdä minulle ilmaista työtä, vaikka oletkin
sukulaiseni? Sano, mitä haluat palkaksesi."
Labanilla oli kaksi tytärtä; vanhemman nimi oli
Lea ja nuoremman Raakel. 
Lealla oli lempeät
silmät, mutta Raakel oli kaunis vartaloltaan ja
kasvoiltaan. 
Jaakob oli rakastunut Raakeliin, ja
niin hän sanoi: "Minä palvelen sinua seitsemän
vuotta, jos annat minulle nuoremman tyttäresi Raakelin." 
Laban sanoi: "Parempi minun on antaa hänet
sinulle kuin jollekin toiselle. Jää minun luokseni
asumaan." 
Niin Jaakob palveli seitsemän vuotta
saadakseen Raakelin, ja ne vuodet tuntuivat hänestä
vain muutamalta päivältä, koska hän rakasti
Raakelia.
Sitten Jaakob sanoi Labanille: "Anna minulle
vaimoni. Palvelusaikani on kulunut umpeen, ja nyt
tahdon saada hänet." 
Laban kutsui silloin koolle
paikkakunnan kaikki asukkaat ja järjesti hääpidot.
Mutta illan tultua hän haki tyttärensä Lean ja
vei hänet Jaakobin luo, ja Jaakob yhtyi häneen.
Laban antoi orjattarensa Silpan tyttärelleen
Lealle orjattareksi.
Kun aamu koitti, Jaakob huomasi, että olikin
saanut Lean. Hän sanoi Labanille: "Mitä oletkaan
minulle tehnyt! Minähän palvelin sinua saadakseni
Raakelin. Miksi sinä petit minua?" 
Mutta Laban
vastasi: "Ei ole meillä päin tapana naittaa nuorempaa tytärtä ennen vanhempaa. 
Vietä nyt vain
hääviikko loppuun tämän vanhemman kanssa, niin saat
sitten palkaksi nuoremmankin, kunhan pysyt minun
palveluksessani toiset seitsemän vuotta." 
Jaakob
suostui siihen ja vietti hääviikon loppuun Lean
kanssa. Sen jälkeen Laban antoi myös tyttärensä
Raakelin hänelle vaimoksi 
ja antoi orjattarensa
Bilhan tyttärelleen orjattareksi. 
Jaakob yhtyi
myös Raakeliin, ja Raakel oli hänelle rakkaampi kuin
Lea. Näin Jaakob palveli Labanin luona vielä toiset
seitsemän vuotta.
Kun Herra huomasi, että Jaakob syrji Leaa, hän
antoi Lean tulla raskaaksi, mutta Raakel pysyi lapsettomana. 
Niin Lea synnytti pojan, jolle hän
antoi nimeksi Ruuben, sillä hän ajatteli: "Herra on
nähnyt minun kurjuuteni.
Nyt mieheni alkaa rakastaa
minua." 
Sitten hän tuli jälleen raskaaksi, synnytti pojan ja sanoi: "Herra on
kuullut, että mieheni syrjii minua, ja siksi hän antoi minulle myös
tämän pojan." Ja hän antoi pojalle nimeksi Simeon.
Sitten hän tuli taas raskaaksi, synnytti pojan
ja sanoi: "Nyt mieheni lopultakin kääntyy minun
puoleeni, koska olen synnyttänyt hänelle kolme
poikaa." Sen vuoksi poika sai nimekseen Leevi.
Ja Lea tuli taaskin raskaaksi, synnytti pojan ja
sanoi: "Vihdoinkin saan ylistää Herraa." Siksi hän
antoi pojalle nimeksi Juuda. Sitten hän ei enää
synnyttänyt.
Nimi Ruuben muistuttaa heprean ilmausta ra'a be'onji
'hän on nähnyt kurjuuteni'. 
Nimi Simeon muistuttaa heprean sanaa sama 'hän on
kuullut'. 
Nimi Leevi muistuttaa heprean sanaa lawa, josta muoto
jillawe on suomeksi 'hän kääntyy puoleeni'. 
Juudan nimen hepreankielinen muoto Jehuda muistuttaa sanaa hoda, josta
muoto ode on suomeksi 'saan ylistää'.
Kun Raakel näki, ettei hän saanut lapsia, hän
alkoi kadehtia sisartaan ja sanoi Jaakobille: "Auta
minua saamaan lapsia, tai muuten minä kuolen!"
Jaakob suuttui Raakelille ja sanoi: "Olenko minä
muka Jumala? Minäkö olen estänyt sinua saamasta
lapsia?" 
Raakel sanoi: "Tuossa on orjattareni
Bilha. Tee hänen kanssaan lapsia, jotka tulevat
minun omikseni. Näin minustakin voi tulla äiti."
Raakel antoi orjattarensa Bilhan Jaakobille
vaimoksi, ja Jaakob yhtyi häneen. 
Bilha tuli
raskaaksi ja synnytti Jaakobille pojan. 
Silloin
Raakel sanoi: "Jumala on ratkaissut asian minun
hyväkseni. Hän on kuullut rukoukseni ja antanut
minulle pojan." Sen vuoksi Raakel antoi pojalle
nimeksi Dan. 
Sitten Raakelin orjatar Bilha tuli
uudelleen raskaaksi ja synnytti Jaakobille toisen
pojan. 
Raakel sanoi: "Minä olen käynyt sisareni
kanssa ankaran kamppailun, ja nyt olen voittanut."
Ja hän antoi pojalle nimeksi Naftali.
Kun Lea näki, ettei hän enää saanut lapsia, hän
antoi orjattarensa Silpan Jaakobille vaimoksi,
ja Lean orjatar Silpa synnytti Jaakobille pojan.
Lea sanoi: "Tuokoon hän onnea!", ja antoi
pojalle nimeksi Gad. 
Sitten Lean orjatar Silpa
synnytti Jaakobille vielä toisen pojan, 
ja Lea
sanoi: "Miten onnellinen minä olenkaan! Nyt naiset
ylistävät minua onnelliseksi." Ja hän antoi pojalle
nimeksi Asser.
Kerran vehnänleikkuun aikaan Ruuben lähti ulos
kävelemään. Hän löysi vainiolta lemmenmarjoja
ja vei ne äidilleen Lealle. Silloin Raakel sanoi Lealle: "Anna
minullekin poikasi tuomia lemmenmarjoja."
Mutta Lea vastasi hänelle: "Eikö riitä, että
sinä olet jo vienyt minulta mieheni, kun nyt vielä
tahdot poikani lemmenmarjat?" Raakel sanoi: "Olkoon
menneeksi, Jaakob saa ensi yönä maata sinun
kanssasi, kunhan minä saan poikasi lemmenmarjat."
Ja kun Jaakob illalla palasi laitumelta, Lea
meni häntä vastaan ja sanoi: "Sinun on nyt maattava
minun kanssani, sillä minä olen ostanut sinut
itselleni poikani löytämillä lemmenmarjoilla."
Jaakob makasi sinä yönä hänen kanssaan. 
Jumala
kuuli Lean rukoukset, ja Lea synnytti Jaakobille
viidennen pojan. 
Lea sanoi: "Jumala on korvannut
minulle sen, että annoin orjattareni miehelleni." Ja
hän antoi pojalle nimeksi Isaskar. 
Sitten Lea
tuli taas raskaaksi ja synnytti Jaakobille kuudennen
pojan. 
Lea sanoi: "Jumala on antanut minulle
hyvän lahjan. Nyt mieheni vihdoinkin pysyy minun
luonani, sillä olen synnyttänyt hänelle kuusi
poikaa." Ja hän antoi pojalle nimeksi Sebulon.
Sen jälkeen Lea synnytti vielä tyttären ja antoi
hänelle nimeksi Dina.
Mutta Jumala muisti myös Raakelia ja kuuli hänen
rukouksensa. Hän antoi Raakelin tulla hedelmälliseksi, 
ja Raakel tuli raskaaksi ja synnytti pojan.
Hän sanoi: "Jumala on ottanut pois minun häpeäni."
Hän antoi pojalle nimeksi Joosef ja sanoi:
"Antakoon Herra minulle vielä toisen pojan."
Kun Raakel oli synnyttänyt Joosefin, Jaakob
sanoi Labanille: "Salli minun lähteä kotiin, omaan
maahani. 
Anna minulle vaimoni ja lapseni, joiden
takia olen palvellut sinua, sitten minä lähden. Sinä
tiedät kyllä, miten hyvin olen sinua palvellut."
Laban vastasi: "Jää toki vielä tänne! Minä olen
tutkinut ennusmerkkejä ja saanut tietää, että juuri
sinun takiasi Herra on siunannut minua." 
Ja hän
sanoi vielä: "Määrää itse, paljonko haluat minulta
palkkaa, minä kyllä maksan sen." 
Jaakob sanoi
hänelle: "Tiedät itsekin, miten minä olen sinua
palvellut ja miten sinun karjasi on lisääntynyt
minun hoidossani. 
Se vähä, mitä sinulla oli
ennen minun tuloani, on kasvanut moninkertaiseksi.
Minun askelissani on Herran siunaus tullut
sinullekin. Mutta enkö minä nyt jo saisi ryhtyä
työhön oman perheeni hyväksi?"
Silloin Laban kysyi: "Mitä minun pitäisi antaa
sinulle?" Jaakob vastasi: "Sinun ei tarvitse antaa
minulle mitään. Mutta jos suostut siihen, mitä nyt
ehdotan sinulle, niin minä paimennan ja vartioin
sinun vuohiasi ja lampaitasi edelleenkin. 
Tänään
minä tarkastan koko sinun vuohija lammaskarjasi.
Vie sinä siitä pois kaikki täplikkäät ja kirjavat
lampaat ja nuorista pässeistä kaikki mustanruskeat,
sekä vuohista kaikki kirjavat ja täplikkäät. Minun
palkkani olkoon tämä, 
ja osoittakoon se, miten
vähään minä tyydyn: kun aikanaan tulet tarkastamaan
laumaa, niin minun palkakseni jääkööt ainoastaan
täplikkäät ja kirjavat vuohet sekä mustanruskeat
lampaat, kaikki muut voit katsoa kuin sinulta varastetuiksi." 
Laban sanoi: "Hyvä on, jos niin tahdot."
Vielä samana päivänä Laban keräsi erilleen
juovikkaat ja kirjavat pukit ja kaikki täplikkäät ja
kirjavat vuohet, kaikki, joissa oli jotakin valkoista, ja kaikki mustanruskeat pässit ja jätti ne
poikiensa paimennettaviksi. 
Sitten Laban siirsi
tämän lauman kolmen päivämatkan päähän Jaakobista,
ja Jaakob jäi paimentamaan Labanin muita vuohia ja
lampaita.
Jaakob otti tuoreita valkopoppelin, mantelipuun
ja plataanin oksia ja kuori niihin raitoja niin,
että valkoinen puu paljastui. 
Kun naaraat olivat
kiimassa, hän pani kuorimansa oksat niiden eteen
juottoruuhiin, vesialtaisiin, joista ne kävivät
juomassa. 
Eläimet, jotka olivat pariutuneet
oksien edessä, synnyttivät juovikkaita, täplikkäitä
ja kirjavia karitsoita. 
Nämä karitsat Jaakob
erotti itselleen. Kun eläimet jälleen olivat
kiimoissaan, hän käänsi niiden päät Labanin karjan
juovikkaisiin ja mustanruskeisiin eläimiin päin.
Omat laumansa hän piti erillään eikä päästänyt niitä
sekaantumaan Labanin vuohiin ja lampaisiin. 
Aina
kun lauman voimakkaat naaraat tulivat kiimaan,
Jaakob asetti oksat juottoruuhiin niiden eteen, niin
että ne pariutuivat oksien edessä. 
Mutta heikkojen eläinten eteen hän ei pannut oksia, ja siksi
jäivät heikot eläimet Labanille ja Jaakob sai
voimakkaat. 
Jaakob rikastui suuresti, ja hänelle
kertyi runsaasti lampaita ja vuohia, orjattaria ja
orjia sekä kameleita ja aaseja.
Nimi Dan merkitsee 'hän on tuominnut', 'hän on ratkaissut
asian'. 
Nimi Naftali muistuttaa heprean sanaa naftulim
'kamppailu'. 
Nimi Gad merkitsee 'hyvä onni'. 
Nimi Asser merkitsee 'onnekas', 'onnellinen'. 
Hedelmällisyyden edistämiseen käytetty kasvi, luultavasti
Mandragora officinarum. 
Nimi Isaskar muistuttaa heprean sanaa sakar 'ostaa',
'korvata' tai 'palkka'. 
Nimi Sebulon liittyy heprean verbiin zabal 'hän pysyy
luona'. 
Nimi Joosef muistuttaa sekä heprean sanaa asaf 'ottaa pois' että sanaa jasaf 'lisätä', 'antaa lisää'. 
Jaakob kuuli Labanin poikien sanovan: "Jaakob on
vienyt kaiken, mikä kuului isällemme, ja hankkinut
koko rikkautensa isämme kustannuksella." 
Jaakob
näki myös Labanin kasvoista, ettei tämä enää ollut
hänelle yhtä suopea kuin ennen. 
Silloin Herra
sanoi Jaakobille: "Palaa isiesi maahan ja
synnyinseudullesi. Minä olen sinun kanssasi."
Jaakob kutsutti Raakelin ja Lean luokseen laidunmaalle, missä hän
paimensi lampaitaan ja vuohiaan,
ja sanoi heille: "Minä huomaan isänne kasvoista,
ettei hän enää ole minulle yhtä suopea kuin ennen,
mutta minun isäni Jumala on aina ollut kanssani.
Tehän tiedätte, että minä olen parhaani mukaan
palvellut isäänne, 
hän sen sijaan on petkuttanut
minua ja muuttanut palkkaani kymmenen kertaa. Jumala
ei kuitenkaan ole antanut hänen tuottaa minulle
vahinkoa. 
Jos isänne sanoi: 'Täplikkäät saavat
olla palkkasi', silloin kaikki lampaat ja vuohet
synnyttivät täplikkäitä, ja jos hän sanoi: 'Juovikkaat saavat
olla palkkasi', niin kaikki eläimet
synnyttivät juovikkaita. 
Jumala otti karjan pois
isältänne ja antoi sen minulle. 
Lampaiden ja
vuohien kiima-aikana minä näin unessa juovikkaiden,
täplikkäiden ja laikukkaiden urosten astuvan lampaita ja vuohia. 
Jumalan enkeli sanoi minulle siinä
unessa: 'Jaakob!' Ja minä sanoin: 'Tässä olen.'
Hän sanoi: 'Näetkö, kaikki urokset, jotka
astuvat lampaita ja vuohia, ovat juovikkaita,
täplikkäitä ja laikukkaita, sillä minä olen nähnyt,
miten Laban sinua kohtelee. 
Minä olen Jumala,
joka ilmestyin sinulle Betelissä, missä sinä
voitelit öljyllä patsaan ja teit minulle
uhrilupauksen. Lähde nyt pois tästä maasta ja palaa
synnyinseudullesi.'"
Silloin Raakel ja Lea vastasivat hänelle:
"Meillä ei ole isämme luona enää mitään perintöosaa
jäljellä. 
Hänhän kohteli meitä kuin orjia, sillä
hän myi meidät ja vielä söi suuhunsa sen hinnan,
jonka oli meistä saanut. 
Koko se rikkaus, jonka
Jumala on ottanut pois meidän isältämme, kuuluu
meille ja lapsillemme! Tee siis nyt niin kuin Jumala
on käskenyt sinun tehdä!"
Niin Jaakob pani lapsensa ja vaimonsa kamelien
selkään, 
otti mukaan laumansa ja kaiken omaisuutensa ja koko sen karjan, jonka hän oli hankkinut
omakseen Mesopotamiassa, ja lähti Kanaaninmaahan
isänsä Iisakin luo. 
Kun Laban oli keritsemässä
lampaitaan, Raakel varasti kotoaan isänsä jumalankuvat. 
Jaakob harhautti aramealaista Labania
eikä kertonut hänelle aikeistaan, 
vaan lähti
salaa matkaan ja vei mukanaan koko väkensä ja
omaisuutensa. Hän ylitti Eufratin ja suuntasi matkansa kohti Gileadin vuoria.
Kahden päivän kuluttua Laban sai tiedon, että
Jaakob oli lähtenyt salaa tiehensä. 
Silloin hän
otti mukaan sukunsa miehet ja tavoitti Jaakobin
seitsemän päivän takaa-ajon jälkeen Gileadin vuorilla. 
Mutta Jumala tuli aramealaisen Labanin luo
yöllä unessa ja sanoi hänelle: "Varo, ettet puhu
pahasti Jaakobille."
Laban kohtasi Jaakobin, kun tämä oli leiriytynyt
Gileadin vuorille, ja myös Laban leiriytyi sinne
miehineen. 
Laban sanoi Jaakobille: "Mitä
oletkaan tehnyt! Sinä olit petollinen ja veit
tyttäreni mukanasi, ikään kuin he olisivat olleet
sotasaalista! 
Miksi pakenit salaa minun luotani
etkä kertonut minulle aikeistasi mitään? Minä olisin
saattanut sinut iloisesti matkaan lauluin,
tamburiinein ja harpuin. 
Et antanut minulle edes
tilaisuutta suudella lapsenlapsiani ja tyttäriäni
hyvästiksi. Siinä teit kovin tyhmästi! 
Minä
voisin tehdä teille paljonkin pahaa, mutta teidän
isienne Jumala sanoi minulle viime yönä: 'Varo,
ettet puhu pahasti Jaakobille.' 
No hyvä! Sinä
lähdit matkaan, koska niin kovasti ikävöit isäsi
luo, mutta miksi varastit minulta jumalankuvat?"
Jaakob vastasi: "Minä lähdin salaa, koska pelkäsin,
että sinä riistäisit minulta tyttäresi.
Mutta kuolema sille, jonka hallusta sinä löydät
jumalasi! Saat sukumme miesten läsnä ollessa itse
tutkia, mitä minulla on mukanani, ja ottaa omasi
pois." Jaakob ei tiennyt, että Raakel oli varastanut
jumalat.
Laban kävi Jaakobin teltassa, sitten Lean ja
molempien orjattarien teltassa, mutta ei löytänyt
mitään. Lean teltasta tultuaan hän meni Raakelin
telttaan. 
Mutta Raakel oli pannut jumalankuvat
kamelin satulasäkkiin ja istui niiden päällä. Laban
penkoi koko teltan eikä löytänyt niitä. 
Silloin
Raakel sanoi isälleen: "Älä vihastu, herrani, vaikka
en voikaan nousta tieltäsi. Minulla on se naisten
tavallinen vaiva." Eikä Laban löytänyt jumalankuvia,
vaikka kuinka etsi.
Silloin Jaakob kiivastui ja alkoi syyttää
Labania. Hän sanoi: "Mikä on minun rikkomukseni,
mitä pahaa minä olen tehnyt, kun näin ryntäät minun
perääni? 
Nyt olet penkonut kaikki minun
tavarani. Löysitkö mitään itsellesi kuuluvaa? Pane
se tähän minun väkeni ja oman väkesi eteen, niin he
saavat ratkaista asian. 
Minä olen ollut luonasi
kaksikymmentä vuotta, eivätkä sinun lampaasi ja
vuohesi ole menettäneet karitsoitaan enkä minä ole
syönyt pässejä sinun laumastasi. 
Aina kun toin
sinulle pedon raateleman lampaan, jouduin sen
korvaamaan. Minä olen saanut siitä vastata, oli se
sitten viety päivällä tai yöllä. 
Päivisin minua
vaivasi helle, öisin en vilulta saanut silmiini
unta. 
Kaksikymmentä vuotta minä olen viettänyt
sinun talossasi, neljätoista vuotta palvelin sinua
saadakseni kaksi tytärtäsi ja kuusi vuotta saadakseni
sinulta lampaita ja vuohia, mutta kymmenen kertaa
sinä muutit minun palkkaani. 
Ellei isäni Jumala,
Abrahamin Jumala, jota myös Iisak palvelee, olisi
ollut minun puolellani, sinä olisit lähettänyt minut
matkaan tyhjin käsin. Mutta Jumala näki minun
ahdinkoni ja työni paljouden ja ratkaisi asian viime
yönä."
Laban vastasi Jaakobille: "Tyttäret ovat kyllä
minun tyttäriäni, lapset minun lapsiani ja karja
minun karjaani. Kaikki, mitä sinä täällä näet, on
minun. Mutta minkä minä nyt mahdan näille tyttärille
tai lapsille, jotka he ovat synnyttäneet? 
Tehkäämme siis sovinto, ja olkoon sillä todistaja."
Niin Jaakob otti kiven, nosti sen pystyyn
patsaaksi 
ja sanoi omalle väelleen: "Kerätkää
kiviä." Miehet hakivat kiviä ja kasasivat ne
röykkiöksi. Sitten he yhdessä aterioivat sen
ääressä. 
Laban antoi röykkiölle nimeksi
Jegarsahaduta, ja Jaakob antoi sille nimen Galed.
Sitten Laban sanoi: "Tämä röykkiö olkoon nyt
sopimuksemme todisteena." Sen vuoksi sitä kutsutaan
nimellä Galed 
ja myös nimellä Mispa, sillä hän
sanoi vielä: "Herra pitäköön meitä silmällä
silloinkin, kun emme enää voi nähdä toinen
toistamme. 
Jos sinä kohtelet huonosti tyttäriäni
ja otat muita vaimoja heidän lisäkseen, niin silloin
on Jumala oleva sopimuksemme todistajana, vaikka
yhtään ihmistä ei olisi läsnä sen todistajana."
Laban sanoi vielä Jaakobille: "Katso tätä
röykkiötä ja tätä patsasta, jonka minä olen
pystyttänyt meidän välillemme. 
Tämä röykkiö ja
tämä patsas todistavat ja muistuttavat siitä, etten
minä saa kulkea niiden ohi pahoin aikein sinua
vastaan etkä sinäkään saa kulkea niiden ohi hyökätäksesi minun kimppuuni. 
Meidän isiemme
Abrahamin ja Nahorin Jumala valvokoon tuomarina tätä
sopimustamme." Jaakob puolestaan vannoi valan sen
Jumalan kautta, jota hänen isänsä Iisak palveli.
Sitten Jaakob uhrasi sillä vuorella teurasuhrin
ja kutsui kaikki muut aterialle kanssaan, ja he
söivät ja viipyivät vuorella sen yön.
Sekä arameankielinen nimi Jegar-sahaduta että hepreankielinen
Galed merkitsevät 'todistuksen röykkiö'. Galed muistuttaa samalla
Gileadin alueen nimeä. 
Nimi Mispa merkitsee 'tähystyspaikka'. 
Heti seuraavana aamuna Laban suuteli lapsia ja
tyttäriään ja siunasi ja hyvästeli heidät. Sitten
hän lähti pois ja palasi kotiseudulleen.
Jaakob jatkoi matkaansa, ja häntä vastaan tuli
Jumalan enkeleitä. 
Heidät nähdessään Jaakob
sanoi: "Tässä on Jumalan etuvartio." Niin paikka sai
nimekseen Mahanaim.
Jaakob lähetti sananviejiä edellään veljensä
Esaun luo Seirin tienoille Edomin maahan 
ja käski
heidän sanoa Esaulle: "Herrani, näin sanoo
palvelijasi Jaakob: 'Olen asunut Labanin luona ja
joutunut viipymään siellä näin kauan. 
Minulle on
kertynyt härkiä ja aaseja, lampaita ja vuohia, orjia
ja orjattaria, ja lähetän nyt sinulle tämän viestin
pyytäen, että ottaisit minut suosiollisesti vastaan.'"
Palattuaan Jaakobin luo sananviejät kertoivat:
"Kohtasimme veljesi Esaun, ja hän on nyt tulossa
sinua vastaan mukanaan neljäsataa miestä." 
Jaakob
pelästyi ja hätääntyi kovin. Hän jakoi väen, joka
hänellä oli mukanaan, samoin lampaat ja vuohet,
nautakarjan ja kamelit kahdeksi joukoksi, 
sillä
hän ajatteli: "Jos Esau käy toisen joukon kimppuun
ja tuhoaa sen, niin toinen joukko pääsee pakoon."
Jaakob sanoi: "Isäni Abrahamin Jumala ja isäni
Iisakin Jumala, Herra, sinä joka sanoit minulle:
'Palaa maahasi ja synnyinseudullesi, niin minä annan
sinun menestyä'! 
Minä en ole ansainnut sitä
suurta hyvyyttä ja armoa, jota olet osoittanut minulle,
palvelijallesi. Pelkkä sauva kädessäni minä
aikoinani tulin yli Jordanin, ja nyt on minulle
karttunut väkeä ja karjaa kahden suuren joukon verran. 
Pelasta minut veljeni Esaun käsistä! Minä
pelkään, että hän tappaa minut ja meidät kaikki,
äitejä ja lapsia myöten. 
Mutta sinä olet
sanonut: 'Minä annan sinun menestyä ja teen sinun
jälkeläisesi lukuisiksi kuin merenrannan
hiekkajyvät, joita ei voi laskea.'" 
Ja Jaakob
jäi sinne siksi yöksi.
Sitten Jaakob erotti omaisuudestaan lahjaksi veljelleen Esaulle 
kaksisataa vuohta ja kaksikymmentä
pukkia, kaksisataa emolammasta ja kaksikymmentä
pässiä, 
kolmekymmentä imettävää kamelia ja
niiden varsat, neljäkymmentä lehmää ja kymmenen
härkää, kaksikymmentä aasintammaa ja kymmenen
aasioritta. 
Hän antoi ne palvelijoidensa
huostaan, kunkin lauman erikseen, ja sanoi heille:
"Kulkekaa eteenpäin minun edelläni ja pitäkää laumat
matkan päässä toisistaan." 
Hän käski ensimmäisen
lauman ajajaa: "Kun veljeni Esau kohtaa sinut ja
kysyy sinulta: 'Kenen miehiä sinä olet, minne olet
menossa ja kenen ovat nuo eläimet, joita ajat?',
niin sano: 'Palvelijasi Jaakobin. Ne on
lähetetty lahjaksi herralleni Esaulle, ja Jaakob
itse on tulossa jäljessämme.'" 
Saman käskyn hän
antoi myös toiselle, kolmannelle ja kaikille
muillekin, jotka ajoivat laumoja. Hän sanoi: "Teidän
tulee sanoa nuo samat sanat Esaulle, kun kohtaatte
hänet. 
Sanokaa myös: 'Palvelijasi Jaakob on
tulossa jäljessämme.'" Jaakob näet ajatteli: "Minä
yritän lepyttää hänet lahjoilla, jotta hän olisi
minulle suopea, kun kohtaan hänet." 
Hänen
lahjaksi erottamansa karja lähti jatkamaan matkaa
hänen edellään, mutta hän itse jäi yöksi leiriinsä.
Samana yönä Jaakob otti mukaan molemmat
vaimonsa, molemmat orjattarensa ja kaikki yksitoista
poikaansa ja kulki kahlaamon kohdalta Jabbokin yli.
Saatettuaan heidät ensin vastarannalle hän käski
kuljettaa yli myös kaiken omaisuutensa. 
Vain
Jaakob itse jäi toiselle rannalle. Siellä muuan mies
paini
hänen kanssaan aamunsarastukseen saakka.
Kun mies huomasi, ettei päässyt voitolle, hän
iski Jaakobia nivustaipeeseen, niin että Jaakobin
lonkka nyrjähti hänen kamppaillessaan miehen kanssa.
Mies sanoi hänelle: "Päästä minut menemään,
sillä päivä valkenee." Mutta Jaakob sanoi: "En
päästä sinua, ellet siunaa minua." 
Mies kysyi
häneltä: "Mikä sinun nimesi on?" Hän vastasi:
"Jaakob." 
Silloin mies sanoi: "Sinua ei pidä
enää sanoa Jaakobiksi, vaan Israeliksi, sillä sinä
olet kamppaillut
Jumalan ja ihmisten kanssa ja
voittanut." 
Jaakob sanoi hänelle: "Sano sinäkin
nimesi." Mutta mies vastasi: "Miksi sinun pitäisi
tietää minun nimeni?" Ja hän siunasi Jaakobin
siellä.
Jaakob antoi paikalle nimeksi Penuel. Hän sanoi:
"Minä olen nähnyt Jumalan kasvoista kasvoihin,
ja
silti olen elossa." 
Aurinko nousi, ja hän jatkoi
matkaansa Penuelista eteenpäin ontuen lonkkaansa.
Tämän vuoksi israelilaiset eivät tänäkään
päivänä syö reisijännettä, joka on nivustaipeen
päällä. Mies oli iskenyt Jaakobia tähän jänteeseen.
Nimi Mahanaim liittyy heprean sanaan mahane 'leiri',
'etuvartio'. 
Nimi Jabbok muistuttaa heprean sanaa abaq 'hän
paini'. 
Nimi Israel merkitsee 'Jumala kamppailee' tai 'Jumala
hallitsee'. 
Nimi Penuel merkitsee 'Jumalan kasvot'. 
Kun Jaakob kohotti katseensa, hän näki Esaun
tulevan neljäsataa miestä mukanaan. Silloin Jaakob
jakoi Lealle, Raakelille ja molemmille orjattarille
heidän lapsensa. 
Hän asetti orjattaret lapsineen
etumaisiksi, Lean ja hänen lapsensa heidän taakseen
ja Raakelin ja Joosefin takimmaisiksi. 
Hän itse
kulki heidän edellään veljeään kohden polvistuen ja
kumartaen välillä seitsemän kertaa maahan saakka.
Mutta Esau juoksi häntä vastaan, syleili häntä,
kietoi kätensä hänen kaulaansa ja suuteli häntä, ja
he itkivät.
Kun Esau huomasi vaimot ja lapset, hän kysyi:
"Keitä ovat nuo, jotka sinulla on mukanasi?" Jaakob
vastasi: "Nämä ovat lapset, jotka Jumala armossaan
on suonut minulle, palvelijallesi." 
Sitten orjattaret astuivat lähemmäksi lapsineen ja kumarsivat
maahan saakka. 
Myös Lea ja hänen lapsensa lähestyivät ja kumarsivat maahan, ja viimeisinä astuivat
esiin Joosef ja Raakel kumartaen maahan saakka.
Esau kysyi: "Mitä oikein olivat ne miehet ja
laumat, jotka jo kohtasin?" Jaakob vastasi:
"Herrani, halusin antaa sinulle jotakin, että
ottaisit minut suopeasti vastaan." 
Esau sanoi:
"Minulla on yllin kyllin omastakin takaa. Pidä vain
omasi, veljeni." 
Mutta Jaakob sanoi: "Ei
suinkaan! Jos nyt todella pidät minua veljenäsi,
niin ota vastaan tämä lahja, sillä minä olen tullut
sinun eteesi niin kuin käydään Jumalan eteen, ja
sinä olet ollut minulle armollinen. 
Ota siis
tämä lahja, jonka olen tuonut sinulle, sillä Jumala
on ollut minulle hyvä ja minulla on nyt kaikkea." Ja
Jaakob taivutteli Esauta ja sai hänet ottamaan
lahjan.
Sitten Esau sanoi: "Lähdetään liikkeelle
yhdessä, samaa matkaa." 
Mutta Jaakob sanoi
hänelle: "Sinähän tiedät, herrani, että lapset ovat
pieniä ja että minun on pidettävä huolta imettävistä
lampaista ja lehmistä. Jos niitä ajetaan liian kovaa
yhdenkin päivän ajan, ne menehtyvät. 
Jatka
matkaa minun edelläni, herrani, niin minä tulen
hiljalleen perässäsi karjalle ja lapsille sopivaa
vauhtia, kunnes saavun luoksesi Seiriin." 
Esau
sanoi: "Sitten minä jätänkin osan väestäni sinun
mukaasi." Jaakob sanoi: "Mitä suotta! Minulle
riittää, että pidät minua veljenäsi."
Esau kääntyi samana päivänä kotimatkalle
Seiriin, 
mutta Jaakob lähtikin Sukkotiin ja
rakensi sinne itselleen talon sekä suojakatoksia
karjalleen. Siitä syystä paikka on saanut nimekseen
Sukkot.
Palatessaan Mesopotamiasta Jaakob saapui turvallisesti
Kanaaninmaahan Sikemin kaupungin luo ja
pystytti leirinsä kaupungin ulkopuolelle. 
Sen
maapalstan, jolle hän siellä pystytti telttansa, hän
osti sadalla kesitalla hopeaa Sikemiltä ja hänen
veljiltään, Hamorin pojilta. 
Hän rakensi sinne
alttarin ja antoi sille nimeksi El-Elohe-Israel.
Nimi Sukkot merkitsee 'katokset'. 
Nimi El-Elohe-Israel merkitsee 'Jumala, Israelin Jumala'. 
Dina, Jaakobin tytär, jonka äiti oli Lea, lähti
tapaamaan seudun tyttöjä. 
Seudun hivviläisen hallitsijan Hamorin poika Sikem näki Dinan, otti hänet
mukaansa ja makasi hänet väkisin. 
Mutta Sikem
kiintyi Dinaan, Jaakobin tyttäreen, rakastui häneen
ja yritti lepyttää hänet. 
Isälleen Hamorille
Sikem sanoi: "Hanki tämä tyttö minulle vaimoksi."
Mutta Jaakob oli jo saanut tietää, että Sikem oli
raiskannut hänen tyttärensä Dinan. Koska hänen poikansa
olivat karjan mukana laitumilla, hän päätti
kuitenkin vaieta heidän tuloonsa saakka.
Sikemin isä Hamor lähti Jaakobin puheille.
Jaakobin pojat olivat juuri palanneet laitumilta
ja kuulleet asiasta. He olivat raivoissaan ja
katkeria, sillä Sikem oli makaamalla Jaakobin
tyttären loukannut Israelin kunniaa, eikä sellaista
voitu sietää. 
Hamor puhui heidän kanssaan ja
sanoi: "Poikani Sikem on rakastunut perheenne
tyttäreen. Antakaa tyttö hänelle vaimoksi, 
ja
tehdään sopimus: antakaa te meille vaimoiksi
tyttäriänne ja ottakaa itse meidän tyttäriämme.
Tulkaa asumaan meidän pariimme, maa on avoinna
edessänne. Jääkää tänne, liikkukaa vapaasti
kaikkialla ja asettukaa tänne." 
Sikem itse sanoi
Dinan isälle ja veljille: "Jos hyväksytte minut,
minä maksan teille niin paljon kuin pyydätte.
Määrätkää morsiamen hinta vaikka kuinka
korkeaksi ja vaatikaa lahjoja vaikka kuinka paljon,
minä maksan mitä pyydätte, kunhan vain annatte tytön
minulle vaimoksi."
Mutta Jaakobin pojat vastasivat Sikemille ja
hänen isälleen Hamorille petollisesti, koska Sikem
oli raiskannut heidän sisarensa Dinan. 
He sanoivat heille: "Meidän ei sovi tehdä sellaista. Emme
voi antaa sisartamme ympärileikkaamattomalle miehelle,
sillä me pidämme sellaista häpeällisenä tekona.
Mutta me suostumme teidän pyyntöönne sillä
ehdolla, että teette niin kuin meillä on tapana ja
ympärileikkaatte kaikki miehet ja pojat. 
Sitten
me annamme teille vaimoiksi tyttäriämme ja otamme
vaimoiksi teidän tyttäriänne ja asetumme asumaan
luoksenne, niin että meistä tulee yksi ja sama
kansa. 
Mutta jos ette suostu
ympärileikkauttamaan itseänne, me otamme tytön ja
lähdemme pois." 
Hamor ja hänen poikansa Sikem
pitivät heidän tarjoustaan hyvänä, 
ja
nuorukainen ryhtyi heti toimeen ehdon täyttämiseksi,
sillä hän oli rakastunut Jaakobin tyttäreen ja
hänellä oli isänsä suvussa paljon vaikutusvaltaa.
Hamor ja hänen poikansa menivät kaupunginportin
aukiolle ja sanoivat kaupungin miehille: 
"Nuo
miehet haluavat elää rauhassa kanssamme. Antaa
heidän jäädä asumaan tälle seudulle ja kierrellä
täällä. Maata täällä kyllä riittää heillekin. Me
voimme ottaa vaimoiksemme heidän tyttäriään ja antaa
omia tyttäriämme heille. 
Mutta nuo miehet
suostuvat jäämään tänne meidän luoksemme ja tulemaan
meidän kanssamme yhdeksi kansaksi vain, jos
ympärileikkaamme täällä kaikki miehet ja pojat, niin
kuin heidän tapoihinsa kuuluu. 
Sillä tavoin
heidän karjansa ja omaisuutensa ja kaikki juhtansa
siirtyvät lopulta meille. Siksi meidän olisi syytä
suostua heidän vaatimukseensa ja näin saada heidät
jäämään luoksemme." 
Kaupungin täysi-ikäiset
miehet myöntyivät Hamorin ja hänen poikansa Sikemin
ehdotukseen, ja kaupungin kaikki miespuoliset
asukkaat ympärileikattiin.
Kahden päivän kuluttua, kun kaupungin miehet
olivat kipeimmillään, kaksi Jaakobin poikaa, Dinan
veljet Simeon ja Leevi, ottivat kumpikin miekkansa,
tunkeutuivat kenenkään estämättä kaupunkiin ja
tappoivat kaikki miespuoliset asukkaat. 
He
pistivät hengiltä myös Hamorin ja hänen poikansa
Sikemin ja veivät Dinan mukanaan Sikemin talosta.
Sitten Jaakobin pojat hyökkäsivät ryöstämään
surmattujen omaisuutta ja kaupunkia, jossa heidän
sisarensa oli raiskattu. 
He ryöstivät kaupungin
asukkaiden lampaat ja vuohet, nautakarjan ja aasit
sekä kaiken, mitä kaupungista ja sen mailta löytyi,
ottivat saaliikseen heidän omaisuutensa ja myös
naiset ja lapset, kaiken mitä taloissa oli.
Silloin Jaakob sanoi Simeonille ja Leeville: "Te
olette vetäneet minun päälleni tässä maassa asuvien
kanaanilaisten ja perissiläisten vihan ja tehneet
minusta henkipaton. Minun väkeni on vähälukuinen;
jos nuo toiset yhdessä käyvät minun kimppuuni ja
voittavat minut, niin se on minun ja minun sukuni
loppu." 
Mutta he vastasivat: "Eihän meidän
sisartamme saa kohdella kuin porttoa!"
; Judit 
Jumala sanoi Jaakobille: "Lähde Beteliin, asetu
sinne asumaan ja rakenna sinne alttari Jumalalle,
joka ilmestyi sinulle, kun pakenit veljeäsi Esauta."
Niin Jaakob sanoi perheelleen ja muulle väelleen:
"Hylätkää vieraat jumalat, joita teillä on, puhdistautukaa ja vaihtakaa vaatteenne, 
niin lähdemme
Beteliin. Minä rakennan sinne alttarin Jumalalle,
joka kuuli minua ahdinkoni hetkellä ja oli matkallani minun kanssani." 
He luovuttivat Jaakobille
kaikki hallussaan olevat jumalankuvat sekä renkaat,
jotka heillä oli korvissaan, ja Jaakob kätki ne
maahan Sikemin luona kasvavan suuren puun alle.
Sitten he lähtivät liikkeelle, ja Jumala saattoi
ympäristön kaupunkien asukkaat kauhun valtaan, niin
etteivät he lähteneet ajamaan takaa Jaakobin poikia.
Jaakob ja koko hänen väkensä saapuivat Lusiin eli
Beteliin, joka on Kanaaninmaassa. 
Hän rakensi
sinne alttarin ja antoi paikalle nimeksi El-Betel
sillä siellä Jumala oli ilmestynyt hänelle hänen
lähdettyään pakoon veljeään. 
Debora, Rebekan
imettäjä, kuoli siellä, ja hänet haudattiin Betelin
rinteeseen tammen alle. Puu sai nimekseen Itkutammi.
Jaakobin palattua Mesopotamiasta Jumala ilmestyi
hänelle vielä uudestaan ja siunasi hänet. 
Jumala
sanoi hänelle:
-- Nimesi on Jaakob,
mutta nyt saat uuden nimen:
kutsuttakoon sinua Israeliksi.
Niin hän sai nimekseen Israel. 
Vielä Jumala
sanoi hänelle:
-- Minä olen Jumala, Kaikkivaltias.
Ole hedelmällinen,
ja tulkoon sukusi suureksi.
Monet kansat saavat sinusta alkunsa,
ja sinusta tulee kuninkaiden kantaisä.
Sen maan, jonka lupasin Abrahamille ja
Iisakille,
minä nyt annan sinulle,
ja myös sinun jälkeläisillesi minä annan sen maan.
Sitten Jumala lähti Jaakobin luota siitä paikasta, missä oli hänelle puhunut.
Jaakob pystytti patsaan, muistokiven, siihen
kohtaan, missä Jumala oli puhunut hänelle, vuodatti
sen päälle viiniä juomauhriksi ja valeli sen öljyllä. 
Ja hän antoi sille paikalle nimen Betel.
Sitten he lähtivät liikkeelle Betelistä. Kun
vielä oli vähän matkaa Efrataan, Raakelin synnytys
alkoi, ja siitä tuli hyvin vaikea. 
Kun tuskat
olivat pahimmillaan, kätilövaimo sanoi hänelle: "Ei
hätää, sinä saat taas pojan." 
Mutta Raakel oli
jo kuolemaisillaan, ja viime hetkellään hän antoi
pojalle nimen Benoni. Jaakob kuitenkin antoi hänelle
nimeksi Benjamin.
Raakel kuoli, ja hänet
haudattiin Efratan eli Betlehemin tien varteen.
Jaakob pystytti patsaan hänen haudalleen, ja
tämä Raakelin hautapatsas on olemassa vielä tänäkin
päivänä.
Sitten Israel
lähti matkaan ja pystytti
telttansa Migdal-Ederin tuolle puolen. 
Hänen
asuessaan sillä seudulla Ruuben makasi isänsä
sivuvaimon Bilhan kanssa, ja Israel sai tietää
siitä.
Jaakobilla oli kaksitoista poikaa. 
Lean poikia
olivat Jaakobin esikoinen Ruuben sekä Simeon, Leevi,
Juuda, Isaskar ja Sebulon, 
Raakelin poikia
olivat Joosef ja Benjamin, 
Raakelin orjattaren
Bilhan poikia olivat Dan ja Naftali, 
ja Lean
orjattaren Silpan poikia olivat Gad ja Asser. Nämä
olivat Jaakobin pojat, jotka syntyivät hänelle
Mesopotamiassa.
Jaakob saapui isänsä Iisakin luo Mamreen,
Kirjat-Arbaan eli Hebroniin, missä Abraham ja Iisak
olivat asuneet muukalaisina.
Iisak eli satakahdeksankymmentä vuotta.
Sitten hän kuoli, ja hänet otettiin isiensä luo
korkeassa iässä ja elämästä kyllänsä saaneena. Hänen
poikansa Esau ja Jaakob hautasivat hänet.
Nimi El-Betel merkitsee 'Betelin Jumala'. 
Nimi Benoni merkitsee 'vaivan, tuskan poika', Benjamin taas
'onnen poika'. 
Israel on Jaakobin toinen nimi, vrt. 
Tämä on luettelo Esaun eli Edomin jälkeläisistä.
Esau otti vaimoikseen kaksi kanaanilaisnaista:
Adan, heettiläisen Elonin tyttären, ja Oholibaman,
joka oli horilaisen Sibeonin pojan Anan tytär.
Heidän lisäkseen hän otti vaimokseen Ismaelin
tyttären Basematin, joka oli Nebajotin sisar. 
Ada
synnytti Esaulle Elifasin, Basemat synnytti Reuelin,
ja Oholibama synnytti Jeusin, Jaelamin ja
Korahin. Nämä olivat Esaun pojat, jotka syntyivät
hänelle Kanaaninmaassa.
Sitten Esau otti mukaan vaimonsa, poikansa,
tyttärensä ja kaiken väkensä, karjansa, kaikki
juhtansa ja kaiken maassa hankkimansa omaisuuden ja
muutti toiseen maahan veljensä Jaakobin tieltä.
Heillä oli kummallakin niin runsaasti karjaa,
etteivät he enää mahtuneet asumaan samalla seudulla
eikä maa, jossa he asuivat muukalaisina, riittänyt
antamaan elantoa heille molemmille heidän suurten
laumojensa vuoksi. 
Esau eli Edom asettui asumaan
Seirin vuorille.
Tämä on luettelo Esaun, Edomin kantaisän,
jälkeläisistä, jotka asuvat Seirin vuoristossa.
Nämä olivat Esaun poikien nimet: Elifas, Esaun
vaimon Adan poika; Reuel, Esaun vaimon Basematin
poika. 
Elifasin pojat olivat Teman, Omar, Sefo,
Gaetam ja Kenas. 
Esaun pojalla Elifasilla oli
myös sivuvaimo Timna, joka synnytti hänelle
Amalekin. Tässä olivat Esaun vaimon Adan
jälkeläiset. 
Reuelin pojat olivat Nahat, Serah,
Samma ja Missa. He olivat Esaun vaimon Basematin
jälkeläisiä. 
Pojat, jotka Esaun vaimo Oholibama,
Sibeonin pojan Anan tytär, synnytti Esaulle, olivat
Jeus, Jaelam ja Korah.
Seuraavassa luetellaan Esaun jälkeläisten heimokunnat. Esaun esikoisen
Elifasin jälkeläisiä olivat nämä heimokunnat: Teman, Omar, Sefo,
Kenas,
Korah, Gaetam ja Amalek. Tässä olivat Elifasin suvun
heimokunnat, jotka asuivat Edomin maassa. Nämä olivat Adan jälkeläisiä.
Esaun pojan Reuelin jälkeläisten heimokunnat
olivat Nahat, Serah, Samma ja Missa. Tässä olivat
Reuelin suvun heimokunnat, jotka nekin asuivat
Edomin maassa. Nämä olivat Esaun vaimon Basematin
jälkeläisiä.
Esaun vaimon Oholibaman pojat olivat Jeus,
Jaelam ja Korah. Heistä saivat nimensä Esaun vaimon
Oholibaman, Anan tyttären, jälkeläisten heimokunnat.
Tässä olivat Esaun pojat ja heistä polveutuneet
heimokunnat. Tämä oli Edomin suku.
Nämä olivat horilaisen Seirin pojat, jotka
entuudestaan asuivat Edomin maassa: Lotan, Sobal,
Sibeon, Ana, 
Dison, Eser ja Disan. Heistä saivat
nimensä horilaisten, Seirin jälkeläisten,
heimokunnat Edomin maassa. 
Lotanin pojat olivat
Hori ja Hemam, ja Lotanilla oli sisar nimeltä Timna.
Sobalin pojat olivat Alvan, Manahat, Ebal, Sefo
ja Onam. 
Sibeonin pojat olivat Aija ja Ana; hän
oli se Ana, joka löysi kuumat lähteet autiomaasta
paimentaessaan isänsä Sibeonin aaseja. 
Anan
poika oli Dison, ja hänen tyttärensä oli Oholibama.
Disonin pojat olivat Hemdan, Esban, Jitran ja
Keran. 
Eserin pojat olivat Bilhan, Saavan ja
Akan. 
Ja Disanin pojat olivat Us ja Aran.
Nämä olivat horilaisten heimokunnat: Lotan,
Sobal, Sibeon, Ana, 
Dison, Eser ja Disan. Tässä
olivat Seirin maassa asuvat horilaisten heimokunnat
järjestyksessä lueteltuina.
Nämä olivat ne kuninkaat, jotka hallitsivat Edomin maassa ennen kuin
israelilaisilla oli kuningasta hallitsijanaan:
Edomin ensimmäinen kuningas oli
Bela, Beorin poika, ja hänen hallituskaupunkinsa
nimi oli Dinhaba. 
Belan kuoltua tuli kuninkaaksi
Jobab, Serahin poika, kotoisin Bosrasta. 
Jobabin
kuoltua tuli kuninkaaksi Husam, kotoisin Temanin
maasta. 
Husamin kuoltua tuli kuninkaaksi Hadad,
Bedadin poika, se joka voitti midianilaiset Moabin
tasangolla. Hänen hallituskaupunkinsa oli Avit.
Hadadin kuoltua tuli kuninkaaksi Samla, kotoisin
Masrekasta. 
Samlan kuoltua tuli kuninkaaksi
Saul, kotoisin Rehobot-Naharista. 
Saulin kuoltua
tuli kuninkaaksi Baal-Hanan, Akborin poika. 
Kun
Baal-Hanan, Akborin poika, kuoli, tuli kuninkaaksi
Hadar. Hänen hallituskaupunkinsa oli Pau. Hänen
vaimonsa oli Mehetabel, Matredin tytär; Matred
puolestaan oli Me-Sahabin tytär.
Nämä olivat Esaun jälkeläisten heimokunnat
lueteltuina suvuittain ja asuinpaikkojensa mukaan:
Timna, Alva, Jetet, 
Oholibama, Ela, Pinon,
Kenas, Teman, Mibsar, 
Magdiel ja Iram. Tässä olivat Edomin maan heimokunnat lueteltuina
asuinpaikkojensa mukaan. Tämä oli Esaun, Edomin kantaisän, suku.
Jaakob jäi asumaan Kanaaninmaahan, missä jo hänen
isänsä oli asunut muukalaisena. 
Tämä on kertomus
Jaakobin suvun vaiheista.
Kun Joosef oli seitsentoistavuotias, hän paimensi
lampaita ja vuohia velipuoliensa, Bilhan ja Silpan
poikien kanssa, ja hänellä oli tapana kannella heistä isälleen. 
Israel rakasti Joosefia enemmän kuin
muita poikiaan, sillä Joosef oli syntynyt hänelle
hänen vanhoilla päivillään. Isä teetti Joosefille
pitkän, värikkään puvun. 
Veljet huomasivat, että
isä piti hänestä enemmän kuin heistä muista, ja he
alkoivat vihata Joosefia, niin etteivät enää voineet
edes puhua hänelle ystävällisesti.
Kerran Joosef näki unen, ja kun hän oli kertonut
sen veljilleen, he vihasivat häntä entistäkin enemmän. 
Hän näet sanoi heille: "Kuulkaapa, millaista
unta minä näin! 
Me olimme pellolla lyhteitä sitomassa, ja yhtäkkiä minun lyhteeni nousi pystyyn ja
teidän lyhteenne kokoontuivat ympärille ja kumartuivat maahan minun lyhteeni eteen." 
Veljet
sanoivat hänelle: "Sinustako tulisi meidän
kuninkaamme, sinäkö muka hallitsisit meitä?" Ja
näiden unien ja puheiden takia he vihasivat häntä
yhä enemmän.
Joosef näki vielä toisen unen ja kertoi senkin
veljilleen: "Taas minä näin unta, ja siinä aurinko,
kuu ja yksitoista tähteä kumartuivat minun eteeni."
Kun hän oli kertonut tämän isälleen ja veljilleen, isä nuhteli häntä:
"Mitä tuollaiset unet ovat olevinaan? Pitäisikö minun ja äitisi ja
veljiesi muka tulla kumartamaan sinua?"
Veljet olivat kateellisia Joosefille, ja hänen isäänsä nämä tapaukset
jäivät askarruttamaan.
Kerran, kun Joosefin veljet olivat menneet
paimentamaan isänsä lampaita ja vuohia Sikemin
seuduille, 
Israel sanoi Joosefille: "Veljesi
ovat karjan kanssa Sikemissä. Sinun pitäisi mennä
sinne heidän luokseen." Joosef vastasi: "Hyvä on,
isä." 
Ja Jaakob sanoi hänelle: "Mene katsomaan,
miten veljesi ja karja voivat, ja tule sitten
kertomaan minulle." Hän lähetti Joosefin matkaan
Hebroninlaaksosta, ja Joosef meni Sikemiin.
Kun Joosef kierteli kaupungin lähistöllä
etsimässä veljiään, muuan mies tuli häntä vastaan ja
kysyi: "Mitä etsit?" 
Joosef vastasi: "Etsin
veljiäni. Oletko nähnyt heitä ja heidän laumojaan?"
Mies sanoi: "He ovat lähteneet täältä pois. Minä
kuulin heidän sanovan: 'Mennään Dotaniin.'" Niin
Joosef lähti veljiensä perään ja löysi heidät
Dotanista. 
He näkivät hänet jo kaukaa, ja ennen
kuin hän oli ehtinyt heidän luokseen, he alkoivat
suunnitella hänen surmaamistaan. 
He sanoivat
toisilleen: "Tuolla se unien näkijä nyt tulee.
Tapetaan hänet, heitetään hänet johonkin kaivoon
ja sanotaan, että peto on hänet syönyt. Sittenhän
nähdään, miten hänen unensa käyvät toteen."
Mutta kun Ruuben kuuli tämän, hän tahtoi
pelastaa Joosefin heidän käsistään ja sanoi: "Ei
sentään lyödä häntä hengiltä. 
Älkää vuodattako
verta. Heittäkää hänet tuonne syrjäiseen kaivoon,
mutta älkää vahingoittako häntä." Näin hän sanoi
pelastaakseen Joosefin heidän käsistään ja
viedäkseen hänet takaisin isänsä luo.
Kun Joosef tuli veljiensä luo, he kävivät häneen
käsiksi, riisuivat häneltä hänen pitkän värikkään
pukunsa 
ja heittivät hänet kaivoon, joka silloin
oli kuivillaan.
Veljekset istuutuivat syömään. Mutta kun he
kohottivat katseensa, he näkivät
ismaelilaiskaravaanin, joka oli matkalla Gileadista
Egyptiin kamelit suitsukkeilla, balsamilla ja
mirhalla kuormattuina. 
Silloin Juuda sanoi
veljilleen: "Mitä hyötyä meille on siitä, että
tapamme veljemme ja joudumme kätkemään verityömme
jäljet? 
Myydään poika noille ismaelilaisille,
niin meidän ei itse tarvitse käydä häneen käsiksi,
onhan hän sentään meidän veljemme." Hänen veljensä
olivat samaa mieltä. 
Kun midianilaiset kauppiaat
kulkivat paikan ohi, veljet vetivät Joosefin
kaivosta ja myivät hänet heille kahdestakymmenestä
hopeasekelistä. Ja kauppiaat veivät Joosefin
Egyptiin.
Kun Ruuben palasi kaivolle ja huomasi, ettei
Joosef ollutkaan siellä, hän repäisi vaatteensa.
Hän meni veljiensä luo ja sanoi: "Poika on
poissa! Kuinka minun nyt käy?" 
Mutta veljet
ottivat Joosefin puvun, teurastivat vuohen ja
kastoivat puvun vereen. 
Sitten he veivät sen
isälleen ja sanoivat: "Tämän me löysimme. Tutki,
onko se poikasi puku vai ei." 
Jaakob tunsi
vaatteen ja sanoi: "Poikani puku! Villipeto on hänet
syönyt, Joosef on raadeltu hengiltä!" 
Ja Jaakob
repäisi viittansa, puki säkkivaatteen vyötäisilleen
ja suri poikaansa pitkän aikaa. 
Hänen poikansa
ja tyttärensä koettivat lohduttaa häntä, mutta hän
ei huolinut lohdutuksesta, vaan sanoi: "Ei, minä
suren, kunnes menen tuonelaan poikani luo." Ja isä
itki Joosefia.
Mutta midianilaiset myivät Joosefin Egyptiin
Potifarille, joka oli faraon hoviherra ja
henkivartijain päällikkö.
Joosef-kertomuksissa kauppiaat mainitaan toisinaan ismaelilaisiksi,
toisinaan midianilaisiksi.
Niihin aikoihin Juuda lähti pois veljiensä luota
ja asettui erään Adullamissa asuvan miehen luo, joka
oli nimeltään Hira. 
Siellä Juuda tapasi kanaanilaisen naisen, Sua-nimisen miehen tyttären,
otti hänet vaimokseen ja yhtyi häneen. 
Nainen
tuli raskaaksi ja synnytti pojan, joka sai nimekseen
Er. 
Sitten nainen tuli jälleen raskaaksi,
synnytti pojan ja antoi hänelle nimeksi Onan.
Nainen synnytti vielä yhden pojan ja antoi
hänelle nimeksi Sela. Juuda oli Selan syntymän
aikoihin Kesibissä. 
Juuda otti esikoiselleen
Erille vaimon nimeltä Tamar. 
Mutta Er, Juudan
esikoinen, oli Herran silmissä kelvoton, ja Herra
antoi hänen kuolla. 
Silloin Juuda sanoi Onanille:
"Makaa veljesi lesken kanssa, täytä velvollisuutesi
hänen lankonaan ja herätä eloon veljesi suku."
Mutta Onan tiesi, ettei lasta pidettäisi hänen
omanaan, ja aina kun hän makasi kälynsä kanssa, hän
antoi siemenensä mennä maahan, ettei antaisi jälkeläisiä veljelleen. 
Herran silmissä hänen tekonsa
oli paha, ja siksi Herra antoi hänenkin kuolla.
Juuda sanoi silloin miniälleen Tamarille: "Muuta
isäsi taloon ja asu siellä leskenä, kunnes poikani
Sela on kasvanut aikuiseksi." Hän näet pelkäsi, että
Selakin kuolisi veljiensä tavoin. Ja Tamar asettui
isänsä taloon asumaan.
Pitkän ajan kuluttua kuoli Suan tytär, Juudan
vaimo. Suruajan jälkeen Juuda lähti adullamilaisen
ystävänsä Hiran kanssa Timnaan lampaiden
keritsiäisiin. 
Kun Tamar sai tietää, että hänen
appensa oli menossa Timnaan keritsemään lampaitaan,
hän riisui leskenpukunsa, koristautui, peitti
kasvonsa hunnulla ja istuutui Enaimin risteykseen
Timnan tien varteen. Hän oli näet huomannut, ettei
häntä haluttu antaa Selalle vaimoksi, vaikka tämä
oli jo aikuinen.
Juuda näki Tamarin ja luuli häntä portoksi,
koska Tamar oli peittänyt kasvonsa. 
Hän poikkesi
Tamarin luo tien sivuun ja sanoi: "Minä haluan maata
kanssasi." Hän ei tiennyt, että nainen oli hänen
miniänsä. Tamar kysyi: "Mitä annat minulle siitä,
että saat maata kanssani?" 
Juuda vastasi: "Minä
lähetän sinulle vuohen laumastani." Tamar sanoi:
"Hyvä on, kunhan annat minulle pantin siihen asti
kun lähetät sen." 
Juuda kysyi: "Mitä minun
pitäisi antaa sinulle pantiksi?" Tamar vastasi:
"Sinetti kaulastasi ja tuo sauva, joka sinulla on
kädessäsi." Juuda antoi ne Tamarille ja makasi hänen
kanssaan, ja Tamar tuli hänestä raskaaksi. 
Tamar
lähti pois, riisui huntunsa ja pukeutui taas
leskenpukuunsa.
Juuda lähetti adullamilaisen ystävänsä Hiran
viemään vuohen naiselle saadakseen panttinsa
takaisin, mutta tämä ei löytänyt naista. 
Hira
kyseli paikkakunnan miehiltä: "Missä on se
pyhäkköportto, joka istui Enaimin tienristeyksessä?"
He vastasivat: "Ei täällä ole ollut mitään
pyhäkköporttoa." 
Niin hän palasi Juudan luo ja
sanoi: "Minä en löytänyt sitä naista, ja
paikkakunnan miehetkin sanoivat, ettei siellä ole
ollut mitään pyhäkköporttoa." 
Juuda sanoi:
"Pitäköön nainen sitten pantin, muuten joudumme
suotta naurunalaisiksi. Minä olen yrittänyt
toimittaa hänelle tämän vuohen, mutta sinä et ole
pystynyt löytämään häntä."
Noin kolmen kuukauden kuluttua Juudalle tultiin
kertomaan: "Sinun miniäsi Tamar on harjoittanut
haureutta ja vieläpä tullut haureudesta raskaaksi."
Juuda sanoi: "Viekää hänet poltettavaksi." 
Tamaria oltiin jo viemässä, kun hän lähetti apelleen sanan: "Minä olen
raskaana siitä miehestä, jonka nämä esineet ovat." Ja hän käski vielä
sanoa: "Katso, kenelle tämä sinetti ja sen nauha sekä tämä sauva
kuuluvat."
Juuda tunsi ne ja sanoi: "Hän
on oikeassa. Minä tein häntä kohtaan väärin, kun en
antanut häntä pojalleni Selalle vaimoksi." Juuda ei
enää maannut Tamarin kanssa.
Kun Tamarin piti synnyttää, kävi ilmi, että
hänellä oli kohdussaan kaksoset. 
Hänen synnyttäessään toinen lapsista työnsi kätensä ulos, ja
kätilövaimo sitoi lapsen käteen kirkkaanpunaisen langan ja sanoi:
"Tämä tuli ensimmäisenä ulos."
Mutta
lapsi veti kätensä takaisin, ja ulos tulikin hänen
veljensä. Kätilövaimo sanoi: "Millaisen repeämän
oletkaan saanut aikaan!" Siksi lapsi sai nimekseen
Peres
. 
Sitten syntyi hänen veljensä, jolla oli
kirkkaanpunainen lanka kädessään, ja hän sai nimekseen Serah
.
Nimi Peres merkitsee 'repeämä'. 
Nimi Serah merkitsee 'punertava'. 
Joosef vietiin Egyptiin, ja egyptiläinen Potifar,
faraon hoviherra ja henkivartijain päällikkö, osti
hänet ismaelilaisilta, jotka olivat hänet sinne
tuoneet. 
Herra oli Joosefin kanssa, ja siksi
hänellä oli aina onni mukanaan. Hän asui egyptiläisen isäntänsä talossa, 
ja isäntä huomasi, että
Herra oli Joosefin kanssa ja antoi Joosefin onnistua
kaikissa toimissaan. 
Joosef pääsi Potifarin
suosioon ja palveli häntä niin hyvin, että Potifar
asetti hänet taloutensa hoitajaksi ja uskoi hänen
haltuunsa koko omaisuutensa.
Kun Potifar oli määrännyt Joosefin taloutensa ja
kaiken omaisuutensa hoitajaksi, Herra siunasi hänen
taloaan Joosefin tähden. Ja Herran siunaus näkyi
kaikessa, mitä Potifarilla oli, niin kotona kuin
tiluksilla. 
Sen tähden Potifar jätti Joosefin
hoitoon koko omaisuutensa eikä itse huolehtinut
muusta kuin mitä hän söi.
Joosef oli kaunis vartaloltaan ja kasvoiltaan.
Niinpä jonkin ajan kuluttua isännän vaimo iski
silmänsä Joosefiin ja sanoi: "Makaa minun kanssani."
Mutta Joosef kieltäytyi ja sanoi isäntänsä
vaimolle: "Isäntäni ei enää välitä itse huolehtia
mistään, hän on uskonut minun hoitooni kaiken
omaisuutensa. 
Minulla on tässä talossa yhtä
paljon valtaa kuin hänelläkin, eikä hän ole
kieltänyt minulta mitään paitsi sinut, koska olet
hänen vaimonsa. Kuinka minä siis voisin tehdä niin
pahan teon ja rikkoa Jumalaa vastaan?" 
Ja vaikka
nainen päivästä toiseen houkutteli Joosefia, Joosef
ei suostunut makaamaan eikä olemaan hänen kanssaan.
Eräänä päivänä, kun Joosef taas tuli taloon
tekemään työtään eikä ketään talonväkeen kuuluvaa
ollut paikalla, 
nainen tarttui Joosefin vaatteeseen ja sanoi: "Tule makaamaan kanssani." Silloin
Joosef pakeni ulos, mutta hänen pukunsa jäi naisen
käsiin. 
Kun nainen näki, että Joosef oli
jättänyt pukunsa hänen käsiinsä ja paennut, 
hän
huusi talonsa palvelijoita ja sanoi: "Katsokaa!
Potifar on tuonut tänne heprealaisen miehen, joka
nyt pitää meitä pilkkanaan. Hän tuli minun luokseni
ja halusi maata kanssani, mutta minä huusin kovaa,
ja kun hän kuuli minun kirkaisevan ja alkavan
huutaa, hän jätti pukunsa tähän ja juoksi pakoon."
Nainen piti Joosefin puvun siihen asti, kun
hänen miehensä palasi kotiin. 
Hän kertoi
miehelleen samat asiat: "Tuo heprealainen orja,
jonka olet tuonut meille, tuli minun luokseni
häpäistäkseen minut, 
mutta kun minä kirkaisin ja
rupesin huutamaan, hän jätti pukunsa minun viereeni
ja juoksi pakoon." 
Kun isäntä kuuli vaimonsa
kertovan, mitä orja oli tehnyt, hän raivostui.
Hän otti Joosefin kiinni ja pani hänet
vankilaan, paikkaan, jossa kuninkaan vankeja
säilytettiin.
Herra piti Joosefista huolta vankilassakin ja
oli hänen kanssaan, niin että hän saavutti vankilan
päällikön suosion. 
Päällikkö uskoi Joosefin valvontaan vankilan muut vangit, ja Joosef huolehti
kaikesta, mitä siellä tehtiin. 
Eikä vankilan
päällikkö lainkaan valvonut Joosefin toimia, koska
Joosef Herran avulla suoritti ne hyvin. Herra antoi
Joosefin onnistua kaikessa.
Viis. 
Jonkin ajan kuluttua tapahtui, että faraon,
Egyptin kuninkaan, juomanlaskija ja leipuri
rikkoivat herraansa vastaan. 
Silloin farao
vihastui näihin kahteen hoviherraansa,
ylijuomanlaskijaan ja ylileipuriin, 
ja toimitti
heidät henkivartijain päällikön vartioitaviksi,
samaan vankilaan jossa Joosefkin oli.
Henkivartijain päällikkö määräsi Joosefin
huolehtimaan heistä ja palvelemaan heitä. Niin he
olivat jonkin aikaa vankeudessa.
Vankilassa ollessaan Egyptin kuninkaan juomanlaskija ja leipuri
näkivät molemmat samana yönä unta.  Kumpikin näki eri unen, joka vaati
oman selityksensä.
Kun Joosef aamulla tuli heidän luokseen, hän
tapasi heidät alakuloisina. 
Hän kysyi näiltä
faraon hovimiehiltä, jotka olivat vankeina hänen
kanssaan hänen isäntänsä talossa: "Miksi te näytätte
tänään niin onnettomilta?" 
He vastasivat: "Olemme nähneet unta, eikä täällä ole ketään, joka
selittäisi unemme." Joosef sanoi: "Unien selitykset tulevat Jumalalta,
mutta kertokaa kuitenkin unenne minulle."
Ylijuomanlaskija kertoi unensa Joosefille sanoen:
"Näin unta, että edessäni oli viiniköynnös 
ja
viiniköynnöksessä oli kolme haaraa. Tuskin se oli
puhjennut lehteen, kun se jo kukki, ja rypäleet
kypsyivät sen tertuissa. 
Minulla oli kädessäni faraon malja, ja minä otin rypäleitä, puristin
niiden mehun faraon maljaan ja annoin maljan faraon käteen."
Joosef sanoi hänelle: "Tämä on unesi
selitys. Nuo kolme haaraa tarkoittavat kolmea päivää. 
Kolmen päivän kuluttua farao ylentää sinut
ja palauttaa sinut entiseen asemaasi, ja sinä saat
antaa maljan faraon käteen niin kuin ennenkin, kun
olit hänen juomanlaskijansa. 
Älä unohda minua,
kun sinun käy hyvin, vaan tee minulle palvelus: puhu
minusta faraolle ja auta minut pois tästä talosta.
Minut on näet ryöstetty tänne heprealaisten
maasta, enkä ole täälläkään tehnyt mitään pahaa.
Silti minut on heitetty tähän vankityrmään."
Kun ylileipuri kuuli, miten hyvin Joosef selitti
unen, hän sanoi: "Minun uneni oli tällainen. Minulla
oli pääni päällä kolme korillista vehnäleipiä.
Ylimmässä korissa oli kaikenlaisia leivonnaisia
faraolle syötäväksi, mutta linnut söivät ne korista
pääni päältä." 
Joosef sanoi: "Tämä on unesi
selitys. Nuo kolme koria tarkoittavat kolmea päivää.
Kolmen päivän kuluttua farao ylentää sinutkin:
hän ripustaa sinut hirsipuuhun, ja linnut syövät
sinun lihasi."
Kolmantena päivänä faraolla oli syntymäpäivä, ja
hän järjesti pidot koko hovinsa väelle. Hän ylensi
ylijuomanlaskijan ja ylileipurin hovinsa nähden:
hän palautti ylijuomanlaskijan entiseen
asemaansa, niin että tämä sai taas antaa maljan
faraon käteen, 
mutta ylileipurin hän hirtätti -juuri niin kuin Joosef oli selittänyt heidän unensa.
Mutta ylijuomanlaskija ei muistanut Joosefia,
vaan unohti hänet.
Pari vuotta myöhemmin farao näki unen. Hän seisoi
Niilin rannalla. 
Yhtäkkiä Niilistä nousi
seitsemän kaunista ja lihavaa lehmää, ja ne jäivät
syömään kaislikkoon. 
Niiden jälkeen Niilistä
nousi vielä toiset seitsemän lehmää, rumia ja
laihoja, ja ne jäivät noiden toisten viereen Niilin
rannalle. 
Ja rumat ja laihat lehmät söivät ne
seitsemän kaunista ja lihavaa lehmää. Siihen farao
heräsi. 
Sitten hän nukahti uudestaan ja näki unta
vielä toisen kerran. Samassa korressa kasvoi
seitsemän paksua ja kaunista tähkää, 
mutta niiden
jälkeen puhkesi esiin seitsemän ohutta, itätuulen
polttamaa tähkää, 
ja ne nielivät ne seitsemän
paksua ja täyteläistä tähkää. Siihen farao heräsi,
ja hän huomasi, että se oli ollut unta.
Aamulla farao oli levottomalla mielellä ja
kutsutti luokseen Egyptin kaikki enteidenselittäjät
ja viisaat. Hän kertoi heille unensa, mutta kukaan
ei osannut selittää niitä hänelle. 
Silloin
ylijuomanlaskija sanoi faraolle: "Minun täytyy nyt
ottaa puheeksi rikkomukseni. 
Farao oli kerran
vihastunut meihin palvelijoihinsa ja pani minut ja
ylileipurin vankeuteen henkivartijain päällikön
taloon. 
Siellä me molemmat näimme eräänä yönä
unta, ja kummankin uni vaati oman selityksensä.
Vankilassa meidän kanssamme oli eräs
heprealainen nuorukainen, henkivartijain päällikön
orja. Me kerroimme hänelle unemme, ja hän selitti ne
meille. 
Ja kävi niin kuin hän oli selittänyt:
farao palautti minut entiseen asemaani, mutta
leipurin hän ripusti hirsipuuhun."
Silloin farao kutsutti Joosefin luokseen. Hänet
haettiin kiireesti vankilasta, hänen partansa ja
hiuksensa ajeltiin, ja hän sai ylleen uudet
vaatteet. Sitten hän tuli faraon luo. 
Farao
sanoi Joosefille: "Minä olen nähnyt unen, eikä
kukaan osaa sitä selittää, mutta minulle on
kerrottu, että sinä pystyt selittämään unen heti sen
kuultuasi." 
Joosef vastasi: "Minä itse en pysty,
mutta Jumala voi antaa faraolle suotuisan
vastauksen."
Farao kertoi Joosefille: "Minä näin unta, että
seisoin Niilin rannalla. 
Silloin Niilistä nousi
seitsemän lihavaa ja kaunista lehmää, ja ne jäivät
syömään kaislikkoon. 
Mutta niiden jälkeen
Niilistä nousi vielä seitsemän muuta lehmää, jotka
olivat niin kurjia, rumia ja laihoja, etten ole
sellaisia nähnyt koko Egyptin maassa. 
Nuo rumat
ja laihat lehmät söivät ne seitsemän ensimmäistä,
lihavaa lehmää. 
Mutta vaikka lihavat lehmät
katosivat niiden suihin, ei mistään voinut huomata,
että laihat olivat ahmineet ne sisäänsä, sillä ne
näyttivät yhtä laihoilta ja rumilta kuin ennenkin.
Siihen minä heräsin. 
Sitten näin taas unta.
Seitsemän täyteläistä ja kaunista tähkää kasvoi
samassa korressa. 
Mutta niiden jälkeen puhkesi
esiin seitsemän kuivettunutta, ohutta ja itätuulen
polttamaa tähkää. 
Ja nämä ohuet tähkät nielivät
ne seitsemän kaunista tähkää. Minä olen kertonut
uneni enteidenselittäjille, mutta kukaan ei osaa
sanoa minulle, mitä ne merkitsevät."
Joosef sanoi faraolle:
"Faraon unet tarkoittavat samaa. Jumala on kertonut
faraolle, mitä hän aikoo tehdä. 
Nuo seitsemän kaunista lehmää tarkoittavat seitsemää vuotta, ja ne
seitsemän kaunista tähkää tarkoittavat samoin seitsemää
vuotta. Molempien unien merkitys on sama.
Ne seitsemän laihaa ja rumaa lehmää, jotka
nousivat niiden kauniiden jälkeen, merkitsevät
seitsemää vuotta, ja samoin ne seitsemän tyhjää ja
itätuulen polttamaa tähkää merkitsevät seitsemää
nälkävuotta. 
Kun sanoin, että Jumala on
näyttänyt faraolle, mitä hän aikoo tehdä, tarkoitin
tätä: 
Seuraavat seitsemän vuotta ovat suuren
yltäkylläisyyden aikaa koko Egyptin maassa,
mutta niitä seuraa seitsemän niin kovaa
nälkävuotta, että koko tuo yltäkylläisyys jää
Egyptissä unohduksiin. Nälänhätä ulottuu yli koko
maan, 
eikä ruoan runsaudesta ole maassa enää
tietoakaan, sillä tuo nälänhätä tulee olemaan hyvin
ankara. 
Faraon unen toistuminen taas merkitsee
sitä, että Jumala on asian varmasti päättänyt ja
panee sen pian täytäntöön.
"Siksi faraon tulisi nyt valita viisas ja
taitava mies Egyptin käskynhaltijaksi. 
Faraon
tulisi myös asettaa maahan virkamiehiä, jotka
ottavat talteen viidenneksen Egyptin sadosta niinä
seitsemänä viljavana vuotena. 
Heidän tulee koota
noina tulevina hyvinä vuosina talteen kaikkea
syötävää ja varastoida faraon valvonnassa viljaa
varmaan talteen kaupunkeihin. 
Tämä vilja olkoon
maassa varalla niiksi seitsemäksi nälkävuodeksi,
jotka tulevat Egyptin maahan. Silloin maa ei joudu
nälänhädän vuoksi perikatoon."
Nämä sanat miellyttivät faraota ja hänen hovinsa
miehiä, 
ja farao sanoi heille: "Voisimmeko
löytää toista hänen veroistaan miestä! Hänessä asuu
Jumalan henki!" 
Joosefille hän sanoi: "Koska
Jumala on tämän kaiken sinulle ilmoittanut, ei voi
olla toista niin viisasta ja taitavaa miestä kuin
sinä. 
Sinä saat hallita minun valtakuntaani, ja
koko kansani on totteleva sinun sanaasi. Vain
valtaistuimeni tekee minut sinua korkeammaksi."
Farao sanoi vielä Joosefille: "Näin minä asetan
sinut hallitsemaan koko Egyptiä." 
Ja farao otti
sinettisormuksensa sormestaan ja pani sen Joosefin
sormeen, puki hänet vaatteisiin, jotka olivat
hienointa pellavaa, ja ripusti hänen kaulaansa
kultakäädyt. 
Hän antoi Joosefin ajaa toiseksi
parhailla vaunuillaan, ja Joosefin edellä huudettiin: "Abrek!"
Näin hänestä tehtiin koko Egyptin
käskynhaltija. 
Ja farao sanoi Joosefille: "Minä
olen farao, mutta ilman sinun lupaasi älköön kukaan
koko Egyptin maassa ryhtykö mihinkään." 
Farao
antoi Joosefille nimeksi Safenat-Paneah ja antoi
hänelle vaimoksi Onin
papin Poti-Feran tyttären
Asenatin. Joosefin valta ulottui yli koko Egyptin.
Joosef oli kolmikymmenvuotias tullessaan faraon,
Egyptin kuninkaan, palvelukseen. Niin Joosef lähti
faraon luota ja kiersi kaikkialla Egyptissä. 
Ja
maa tuotti seitsemänä yltäkylläisyyden vuotena viljaa ylen määrin. 
Näiden Egyptin seitsemän hyvän
vuoden aikana Joosef keräsi kaikkea syötävää ja
talletti sen kaupunkeihin. Hän varastoi kaupunkeihin
kaiken viljan, jonka ympäristön pellot tuottivat.
Hän varastoi viljaa niin suunnattomat määrät,
että lopulta sitä oli kuin hiekkaa meren rannalla
eikä sen määrää enää voitu mitata.
Joosefille syntyi ennen ensimmäisen nälkävuoden
tuloa kaksi poikaa. Heidän äitinsä oli Asenat, Onin
papin Poti-Feran tytär. 
Esikoiselleen Joosef
antoi nimeksi Manasse sanoen: "Jumala on saanut
minut unohtamaan
kaikki vaivani ja isäni kodin."
Toiselle pojalleen hän antoi nimeksi Efraim
sanoen: "Jumala on tehnyt minut hedelmälliseksi
maassa, jossa olen joutunut niin paljon kärsimään."
Kun Egyptin seitsemän yltäkylläisyyden vuotta
olivat kuluneet, 
alkoi seitsemän nälkävuoden
aika, kuten Joosef oli ennalta sanonut. Kato tuli
kaikkiin muihinkin maihin, mutta Egyptin maassa oli
tallella syötävää. 
Kun nälkä alkoi vaivata koko
Egyptiä ja kansa huusi faraolta leipää, tämä sanoi
egyptiläisille: "Menkää Joosefin luo ja tehkää niin
kuin hän käskee." 
Kun nälkä jo vallitsi koko
maassa, Joosef avasi viljavarastot ja myi viljaa
egyptiläisille. Nälänhätä oli Egyptissä ankara.
Myös muista maista tultiin Egyptiin Joosefin luo
viljaa ostamaan, sillä kaikkialla vallitsi kova
nälkä.
; 1. Makk. 
Sana abrek merkitsee luultavasti 'antakaa tietä!' tai
'polvillenne!'. 
Onin kaupunki tunnetaan nykyisin nimellä Heliopolis. 
Nimi Manasse merkitsee 'hän saa unohtamaan'. 
Nimi Efraim muistuttaa heprean sanaa hifra 'hän on tehnyt hedelmälliseksi'. 
Kun Jaakob kuuli, että Egyptistä sai viljaa, hän
sanoi pojilleen: "Mitä te siinä vain katsotte toisianne? 
Olen kuullut, että Egyptissä on viljaa.
Menkää sinne ja ostakaa meille sieltä viljaa, että
pysyisimme hengissä emmekä menehtyisi." 
Niin kymmenen Joosefin veljeä lähti ostamaan viljaa Egyptistä. 
Mutta Benjaminia, Joosefin täysveljeä, Jaakob
ei päästänyt toisten mukaan, sillä hän pelkäsi, että
Benjaminille voisi sattua jotakin.
Jaakobin pojat lähtivät yhdessä muiden Egyptiin
menijöiden kanssa viljaa ostamaan, sillä
Kanaaninmaassa vallitsi nälänhätä. 
Joosef, joka
oli Egyptin käskynhaltijana, myi viljaa kaikille
ihmisille. Niin myös Joosefin veljet tulivat hänen
eteensä ja lankesivat kasvoilleen maahan.
Nähdessään veljensä Joosef tunsi heidät, mutta ei
ollut tuntevinaan. Hän puhutteli heitä ankarasti ja
kysyi: "Mistä te tulette?" He vastasivat: "Olemme
tulleet Kanaaninmaasta tänne ruokaa ostamaan."
Vaikka Joosef tunsi veljensä, he eivät tunteneet
häntä. 
Silloin Joosef muisti unet, jotka hän oli nähnyt heistä. Hän sanoi:
"Vakoojia te olette! Olette vain tulleet katsomaan, mistä maahan olisi
helpointa tunkeutua."
He vastasivat: "Emme
suinkaan, herra! Me, sinun palvelijasi, olemme
tulleet ostamaan ruokaa. 
Olemme kaikki saman
miehen poikia, rehellistä väkeä emmekä mitään
vakoojia." 
Mutta Joosef sanoi: "Vielä mitä! Te
olette tulleet katsomaan, mistä maahan voisi
tunkeutua." 
He sanoivat: "Meitä, sinun
palvelijoitasi, on ollut kaksitoista veljestä,
kaikki saman miehen poikia Kanaaninmaasta. Nuorin
jäi isämme luo, ja yhtä ei enää ole." 
Joosef
sanoi: "Aivan kuten sanoin, vakoojia te olette.
Ja näin teidät tutkitaan: ellei nuorin veljenne
tule tänne, te ette pääse lähtemään täältä, niin
totta kuin farao elää! 
Lähettäkää yksi
joukostanne hakemaan veljeänne, te muut jäätte tänne
vankeuteen. Sittenhän nähdään, oletteko puhuneet
totta. Ellette näin tee, te olette vakoojia, niin
totta kuin farao elää!" 
Ja hän heitätti heidät
vankilaan kolmeksi päiväksi.
Kolmantena päivänä Joosef sanoi heille: "Tehkää
kuten sanon, niin saatte pitää henkenne, sillä minä
olen Jumalaa pelkäävä mies. 
Voitte osoittaa rehellisyytenne näin: Yksi teistä jää tänne vankilaan.
Te muut saatte mennä ja viedä ostamanne viljan
nälkää näkeville perheillenne. 
Tuokaa sitten nuorin veljenne minun luokseni. Näin osoitatte
puhuneenne totta, eikä teidän tarvitse kuolla."
Veljet suostuivat tähän 
ja sanoivat toisilleen:
"Me olemme todellakin ansainneet rangaistuksen
siitä, mitä teimme veljellemme. Me näimme hänen
hätänsä, kun hän rukoili meiltä armoa, mutta emme
kuunnelleet häntä. Siksi me nyt olemme ahdingossa."
Ruuben sanoi heille: "Minähän kielsin teitä
tekemästä pojalle pahaa, mutta te ette kuunnelleet.
Nyt joudumme tilille hänen kuolemastaan." 
Mutta
he eivät tienneet, että Joosef ymmärsi heidän
puheensa, sillä hän puhui heille tulkin
välityksellä. 
Joosef poistui heidän luotaan ja
itki. Palattuaan hän puhui vielä heidän kanssaan,
otti sitten Simeonin heidän joukostaan ja vangitutti
hänet heidän nähtensä.
Joosef käski palvelijoittensa täyttää heidän
säkkinsä viljalla, panna kullekin säkkiin hänen
maksamansa hopean ja antaa heille evästä matkaa
varten. 
He kuormasivat ostamansa viljan aasien
selkään ja lähtivät kotimatkalle.
Yöpymispaikassa yksi heistä avasi säkkinsä
antaakseen viljaa aasilleen ja löysikin säkin suulta
hopeansa. 
Hän sanoi veljilleen: "Minä olen
saanut hopeani takaisin, se on päällimmäisenä minun
säkissäni!" Silloin he katsoivat toisiaan
pelästyneinä ja vavisten ja sanoivat: "Mitä Jumala
onkaan tehnyt meille?"
Tultuaan isänsä Jaakobin luo Kanaaninmaahan veljekset kertoivat
hänelle kaiken, mitä heille oli tapahtunut, ja sanoivat:
"Se mies, joka on maan
valtiaana, puhui meille ankarasti ja väitti meidän
vakoilevan maata. 
Me sanoimme hänelle: 'Me
olemme rehellistä väkeä emmekä mitään vakoojia.
Meitä on ollut kaksitoista veljestä, kaikki
saman isän poikia. Yhtä ei enää ole, ja nuorin jäi
isämme luo Kanaaninmaahan.' 
Silloin se mies,
maan valtias, sanoi meille: 'Tällä tavoin minä saan
tietää, oletteko rehellisiä: jättäkää yksi
joukostanne luokseni, ottakaa mukaanne viljaa nälkää
näkeville perheillenne 
ja menkää hakemaan tänne
nuorin veljenne, niin minä uskon, ettette ole
vakoojia, vaan rehellistä väkeä. Silloin annan
teille takaisin tänne jäävän veljenne, ja te saatte
vapaasti liikkua maassa.'"
Kun he sitten avasivat säkkinsä, jokainen löysi
säkistään oman hopeansa, ja hopean nähdessään he ja
heidän isänsä pelästyivät. 
Heidän isänsä Jaakob
sanoi: "Te olette vieneet minulta lapseni! Joosefia
ei enää ole, Simeonia ei enää ole, ja nyt aiotte
viedä vielä Benjaminin! Minun elämäni on pelkkää
surkeutta!" 
Silloin Ruuben sanoi isälleen: "Saat vaikka tappaa minun kaksi
poikaani, ellen tuo Benjaminia takaisin luoksesi! Anna hänet minun
huostaani, minä kyllä tuon hänet sinulle takaisin."
Mutta Jaakob sanoi: "Minun poikani ei lähde teidän mukaanne. Hänen oma
veljensä on kuollut, ja vain hän on enää jäljellä. Jos hänen käy
huonosti matkalla, suru murtaa minut, ja niin te syöksette harmaapään
isänne tuonelaan."
Nälänhätä oli Kanaaninmaassa kova. 
Kun
Egyptistä tuotu vilja oli loppunut, Jaakob sanoi
pojilleen: "Lähtekää jälleen ostamaan meille vähän
syötävää." 
Juuda vastasi: "Se mies antoi meille
ankaran määräyksen, ettemme saa astua hänen eteensä,
ellei veljemme ole mukanamme. 
Me lähdemme kyllä
Egyptiin ostamaan sinulle syötävää, jos annat
veljemme tulla mukaan, 
mutta jos et aio päästää
häntä, me emme lähde sinne, sillä se mies sanoi
meille: 'Ette saa astua minun eteeni, ellei veljenne
ole mukananne.'" 
Isä sanoi: "Miksi te onnettomat
menitte kertomaan hänelle, että teillä on vielä yksi
veli?" 
He vastasivat: "Se mies uteli kaikenlaista
meistä ja suvustamme ja kysyi: 'Vieläkö isänne elää?
Onko teillä vielä muita veljiä?' Me kerroimme
hänelle niin kuin asiat ovat. Mistä me saatoimme
tietää, että hän käskisi meidän viedä sinne
Benjaminin?"
Juuda sanoi isälleen Israelille: "Päästä poika
minun mukaani, niin me lähdemme matkaan. Vain sillä
tavoin me voimme kaikki pysyä hengissä, me sekä
vaimomme ja lapsemme. 
Minä otan itse vastatakseni
hänestä, minut voit vaatia tilille hänen hengestään.
Jos en tuo häntä takaisin tänne sinun luoksesi, minä
olen aina oleva sinun edessäsi syyllinen.
Jollemme olisi näin vitkastelleet, olisimme
ehtineet käydä siellä jo kaksikin kertaa."
Heidän isänsä Israel sanoi: "Tehkää sitten niin, mutta ottakaa
säkkeihinne tämän maan parhaita tuotteita ja viekää ne sille miehelle:
hiukan balsamia, hiukan hunajaa, suitsuketta ja mirhaa,
pistaasipähkinöitä ja manteleita.
Ottakaa mukaanne kaksinkertainen määrä hopeaa, niin että voitte palauttaa
sen hopean, joka oli pantu säkkienne suulle. Ehkä se
oli joutunut sinne vahingossa. 
Ottakaa siis veljenne mukaan ja menkää takaisin. 
Jumala, Kaikkivaltias, auttakoon teitä, kun joudutte sen miehen eteen,
niin että hän päästää Simeonin ja myös Benjaminin lähtemään
kanssanne. Mutta jos minun täytyy menettää lapseni, käyköön sitten
niin."
Miehet kokosivat lahjansa, ottivat kaksinkertaisen määrän hopeaa ja
lähtivät Egyptiin Benjamin mukanaan. Siellä he astuivat Joosefin
eteen.
Joosef näki Benjaminin heidän joukossaan ja
sanoi taloutensa hoitajalle: "Vie nuo miehet minun
talooni, ota karjasta teuras ja valmista se ruoaksi,
sillä he aterioivat päivällä minun kanssani."
Mies teki niin kuin Joosef oli käskenyt. 
Kun veljet huomasivat, että heitä vietiin Joosefin taloon, he
pelästyivät ja sanoivat: "Meidät on varmaan tuotu tänne sen hopean
takia, joka viime kerralla oli joutunut takaisin säkkeihimme, ja nyt
he kai hyökkäävät kimppuumme, ottavat meidät orjiksi ja vievät
aasimme."
Kun tultiin talon portille, he menivät Joosefin
taloutta hoitavan miehen luo ja sanoivat hänelle:
"Suo anteeksi, että vaivaamme sinua, herra. Me
olemme käyneet täällä kerran aikaisemminkin viljaa
ostamassa, 
ja kun tulimme yöpymispaikkaan ja
avasimme säkkimme, jokainen meistä löysi hopeansa
täysimääräisenä säkkinsä suulta. Sen me olemme nyt
tuoneet takaisin, 
ja meillä on vielä lisää
hopeaa viljan ostamista varten. Emme tiedä, kuka oli
pannut hopean säkkeihimme." 
Taloudenhoitaja
vastasi: "Olkaa rauhassa, älkää pelätkö. Teidän
Jumalanne ja isänne Jumala on pannut aarteen
säkkeihinne. Teidän hopeanne minä olen jo saanut."
Ja hän toi Simeonin heidän luokseen.
Sitten mies vei heidät sisälle taloon, toi
heille vettä, että he saivat pestä matkan pölyt
jaloistaan, ja antoi rehua heidän aaseilleen.
Odottaessaan Joosefia, jonka piti saapua
keskipäivällä, he ottivat esiin lahjansa, sillä he
olivat kuulleet, että he saisivat aterioida siellä.
Kun Joosef tuli taloon, he veivät hänelle lahjat
ja lankesivat maahan hänen eteensä. 
Joosef
tervehti heitä ja kysyi: "Mitä kuuluu vanhalle
isällenne, josta kerroitte minulle? Elääkö hän vielä?" 
He vastasivat: "Isällemme, sinun
palvelijallesi, kuuluu hyvää. Hän on edelleenkin
elossa." Ja he polvistuivat ja heittäytyivät
kasvoilleen.
Kun Joosef huomasi Benjaminin, oman äitinsä
pojan, hän kysyi: "Tämäkö on nuorin veljenne, josta
minulle puhuitte?" Ja hän sanoi: "Jumala siunatkoon
sinua, poika!" 
Sitten Joosef poistui kiireesti,
sillä nähdessään veljensä Benjaminin hän liikuttui
niin, että hänen oli vaikea pidättää itkuaan. Hän
meni sisähuoneeseen ja itki siellä. 
Pestyään kasvonsa hän tuli takaisin, pakottautui rauhalliseksi ja
sanoi: "Tuokaa ruoka sisään."
Ja ruokaa tuotiin erikseen hänelle, erikseen veljille ja erikseen
niille egyptiläisille, jotka söivät hänen luonaan, sillä egyptiläiset
eivät aterioi heprealaisten kanssa; se on egyptiläisistä sopimatonta.
Veljet
sijoitettiin istumaan Joosefia vastapäätä,
ikäjärjestyksessä, vanhin ensimmäiselle sijalle ja
nuorin viimeiselle. Veljekset katselivat ihmeissään
toisiaan. 
Kun sitten Joosef jakoi heille omista
ruoistaan valitsemiaan paloja, Benjamin sai niitä
viisi kertaa enemmän kuin muut veljet. Ja he joivat
kaikki yhdessä ja humaltuivat.
Joosef sanoi taloutensa hoitajalle: "Pane noiden miesten säkkeihin
syötävää niin paljon kuin he pystyvät kuljettamaan ja pane kunkin
miehen hopea hänen säkkinsä suuhun.
Mutta nuorimman miehen säkin
suuhun sinun on pantava minun hopeamaljani ja
lisäksi se hopea, joka hänellä oli viljan ostoa
varten." Ja mies teki niin kuin Joosef oli käskenyt.
Aamunkoitteessa miesten annettiin lähteä matkaan
aaseineen. 
Mutta kun he olivat ehtineet vasta
vähän matkan päähän kaupungista, Joosef sanoi
taloutensa hoitajalle: "Lähde noiden miesten perään,
ja kun tavoitat heidät, sano heille: 'Miksi olette
palkinneet hyvän pahalla? 
Teillähän on mukananne
se malja, josta herrani juo ja jonka avulla hän
näkee tulevat tapahtumat. Kovin pahasti olette tehneet!'"
Kun mies tavoitti heidät, hän sanoi heille niin
kuin oli käsketty. 
He vastasivat: "Miksi sinä
puhut noin, herra? Eihän meille tulisi mieleenkään,
että tekisimme mitään sellaista! 
Sen hopeankin,
jonka aikaisemmin löysimme säkkiemme suusta, me
toimme sinulle Kanaaninmaasta takaisin. Miten me
siis olisimme varastaneet hopeaa tai kultaa isäntäsi
talosta? 
Jos malja löytyy joltakulta meistä, hän
olkoon kuoleman oma, ja muista tulkoon herramme
orjia!" 
Mies sanoi: "Puhukaa mitä puhutte, mutta jos malja joltakulta löytyy,
hän joutuu minun orjakseni. Te muut olette vapaat kaikesta vastuusta."
Veljekset laskivat säkkinsä kiireesti maahan ja
avasivat ne. 
Mies tutki ne aloittaen vanhimmasta
veljestä ja lopettaen nuorimpaan, ja malja löytyi
Benjaminin säkistä. 
Silloin veljekset repäisivät
vaatteensa, kuormasivat tavaransa uudelleen aasiensa
selkään ja palasivat kaupunkiin.
Niin Juuda ja hänen veljensä menivät Joosefin
taloon, jossa tämä odotti heitä, ja he heittäytyivät
kasvoilleen maahan. 
Joosef sanoi heille: "Mitä
olettekaan tehneet! Olisihan teidän pitänyt tietää,
että minunlaiseni mies näkee salatutkin asiat."
Juuda vastasi: "Mitä voisimme enää sanoa
sinulle, herramme? Mitä puhuisimme ja miten voisimme
todistaa syyttömyytemme? Jumala on osoittanut meidät
syyllisiksi, ja sen tähden me olemme nyt kaikki
sinun orjiasi, se jolta malja löytyi ja yhtä lailla
me kaikki muut." 
Mutta Joosef sanoi: "Se ei käy!
Vain se mies, jolta malja löytyi, olkoon minun
orjani, ja te muut saatte rauhassa palata isänne
luo."
Silloin Juuda astui Joosefin eteen ja sanoi:
"Anna anteeksi, herra, että rohkenen puhua muutaman
sanan. Älä vihastu minuun -- sinä, joka olet kuin
farao. 
Sinä itse kysyit meiltä: 'Onko teillä
isää tai veljeä?' 
Ja me sanoimme sinulle:
'Meillä on vanha isä, ja hänellä on nuori poika,
joka on syntynyt hänen vanhoilla päivillään. Pojan
oma veli on kuollut, hän on äitinsä lapsista ainoana
jäljellä ja isällemme hyvin rakas.' 
Sinä sanoit
meille: 'Tuokaa hänet tänne minun luokseni, että
saan nähdä hänet omin silmin.' 
Ja me sanoimme
sinulle: 'Poika ei voi lähteä isänsä luota, sillä
jos hän lähtee, isä kuolee.' 
Silloin sinä sanoit
meille: 'Jos nuorin veljenne ei tule tänne teidän
mukananne, ette saa enää astua minun eteeni.'
"Kun olimme palanneet kotiin, kerroimme isällemme, sinun
palvelijallesi, mitä olit sanonut.
Kun
hän sitten kerran sanoi: 'Lähtekää jälleen ostamaan
meille vähän syötävää', 
me vastasimme: 'Emme voi
mennä sinne, ellei nuorin veljemme ole mukanamme.
Ilman häntä emme voi astua sen miehen eteen.'
Niin isämme sanoi meille: 'Tiedättehän, että
vaimoni synnytti minulle kaksi poikaa. 
Toinen
heistä lähti luotani, ja minä luulen, että hänet on
peto raadellut, sillä en ole sen koommin nähnyt
häntä. 
Jos te nyt viette tämän toisenkin pois
luotani ja hänelle sattuu onnettomuus, te syöksette
minut, harmaapään, murheen murtamana tuonelaan.'
"Jos minä nyt palaan isäni luo ja hän näkee,
ettei minulla ole mukanani tätä poikaa, johon hän on
koko sydämestään kiintynyt, 
niin suru vie hänet
hautaan. Silloin me olemme syösseet vanhan isämme
tuonelaan. 
Minä, sinun palvelijasi, olen mennyt
isälleni takuuseen pojasta ja sanonut hänelle: 'Jos
en tuo häntä sinun luoksesi, olen ikuisesti syyllinen sinun edessäsi.' 
Salli siis minun jäädä
pojan sijasta sinun orjaksesi, herra, ja anna pojan
mennä kotiin veljiensä mukana. 
Kuinka minä
voisin mennä isäni luo ilman häntä? En voisi
katsella sitä murhetta, joka tulee isäni osaksi."
Nyt Joosef ei enää jaksanut hillitä itseään.
Koska paikalla oli paljon palvelusväkeä, hän huusi:
"Pois täältä kaikki!" Niinpä ketään vierasta ei
ollut läsnä, kun Joosef kertoi veljilleen, kuka hän
oli. 
Hän puhkesi itkemään niin suureen ääneen,
että egyptiläiset faraon hovia myöten kuulivat sen.
Joosef sanoi veljilleen: "Minä olen Joosef.
Vieläkö isäni elää?" Mutta hänen veljensä eivät
tyrmistykseltään kyenneet vastaamaan hänelle mitään.
Joosef sanoi veljilleen: "Tulkaa tänne minun
luokseni." He astuivat lähemmäksi, ja hän sanoi:
"Minä olen Joosef, teidän veljenne, jonka te myitte
Egyptiin. 
Mutta älkää olko murheissanne älkääkä
syyttäkö itseänne siitä, että olette myyneet minut
tänne, sillä Jumala lähetti minut teidän edellänne
pelastamaan ihmishenkiä. 
Nälkä on nyt jo kaksi
vuotta vallinnut kaikkialla, ja edessä on vielä
viisi vuotta, joina ei kynnetä peltoa eikä korjata
satoa. 
Mutta Jumala lähetti minut teidän edellänne, jotta te jäisitte eloon
ja teidän sukunne säilyisi maan päällä ja monet pelastuisivat.
Te ette
siis lähettäneet minua tänne, vaan Jumala, ja hän
asetti minut faraon neuvonantajaksi, koko hänen
valtakuntansa herraksi ja Egyptin maan valtiaaksi.
"Menkää nyt kiireesti isäni luo ja sanokaa hänelle: 'Näin sanoo
poikasi Joosef: Jumala on asettanut minut koko Egyptin herraksi. Tule
viipymättä tänne minun luokseni,
niin saatte asua minun lähelläni Gosenin maakunnassa, sinä, poikasi ja
heidän lapsensa. Te saatte tuoda tänne lampaanne, vuohenne,
nautakarjanne ja kaiken muun teille kuuluvan.
Minä huolehdin sinun elatuksestasi, niin ettet sinä eikä sinun
perheesi tai kukaan muukaan väestäsi jää puutteeseen, sillä
nälkävuosia on vielä viisi jäljellä.'
Näettehän omin silmin, ja veljeni Benjamin
näkee, että minä itse puhun teille. 
Kertokaa
vielä isälleni, miten korkeassa asemassa minä olen
Egyptissä ja mitä kaikkea olette nähneet, ja tuokaa
isä kiireesti tänne."
Sitten Joosef lankesi veljensä Benjaminin
kaulaan ja puhkesi itkuun, ja myös Benjamin syleili
häntä ja itki. 
Ja Joosef suuteli ja syleili
itkien kaikkia veljiään. Sen jälkeen hänen veljensä
puhelivat pitkään hänen kanssaan.
Kun tieto Joosefin veljien saapumisesta tuli
faraon hoviin, se oli mieleen faraolle ja hänen
hovimiehilleen. 
Farao sanoi Joosefille: "Sano
veljillesi näin: 'Kuormatkaa juhtanne ja lähtekää
Kanaaninmaahan. 
Tuokaa sieltä isänne ja perheenne ja tulkaa minun luokseni, niin minä annan teille
parasta, mitä Egyptistä löytyy, ja te saatte yllin
kyllin nauttia maan antimista.' 
Saat myös sanoa
heille näin: 'Ottakaa Egyptistä vaunuja mukaanne
vaimojanne ja lapsianne varten, käykää hakemassa
isänne ja palatkaa tänne. 
Älkää olko huolissanne
tavaroista, sillä teille kuuluu kaikki, mikä Egyptissä on parasta.'"
Jaakobin pojat tekivät niin, ja Joosef antoi
heille vaunuja faraon lupauksen mukaisesti sekä
evästä matkaa varten. 
Hän antoi heille kaikille
uudet juhlavaatteet, mutta Benjaminille hän antoi
kolmesataa sekeliä hopeaa ja viisi uutta pukua.
Lisäksi hän lähetti isälleen kymmenen Egyptin
parhailla tuotteilla kuormattua aasia sekä kymmenen
aasintammaa, joilla oli kuormanaan viljaa, leipää ja
muuta matkaevästä. 
Sitten hän päästi veljensä
lähtemään ja sanoi heille: "Älkää riidelkö matkalla."
Joosefin veljet lähtivät Egyptistä ja saapuivat
Kanaaninmaahan isänsä Jaakobin luo. 
He kertoivat
hänelle: "Joosef on elossa! Hän on koko Egyptin maan
valtias!" Mutta Jaakobin mieli oli turtunut eikä hän
uskonut heitä. 
Vasta kun he kertoivat kaiken,
mitä Joosef oli heille sanonut, ja kun Jaakob näki
vaunut, jotka Joosef oli lähettänyt häntä hakemaan,
hänen henkensä elpyi. 
Hän sanoi: "Se on
sittenkin totta! Poikani Joosef elää! Minä lähden
Egyptiin, että saan nähdä hänet ennen kuin kuolen."
Niin Israel lähti liikkeelle ja otti mukaan kaiken väkensä ja
omaisuutensa. Kun hän saapui Beersebaan, hän uhrasi teurasuhreja
isänsä Iisakin Jumalalle.
Yöllä Jumala sanoi Israelille näyssä:
"Jaakob, Jaakob!" Hän vastasi: "Tässä olen."
Jumala sanoi: "Minä olen Jumala, isäsi Jumala.
Älä pelkää lähteä Egyptiin, minä teen sinusta siellä
suuren kansan. 
Minä itse tulen sinun mukanasi
Egyptiin ja tuon sinut sieltä myös takaisin. Ja
Joosef on painava sinun silmäsi kiinni."
Jaakob lähti Beersebasta, ja hänen poikansa
kuljettivat hänet sekä lapsensa ja vaimonsa Egyptiin
niillä vaunuilla, jotka farao oli lähettänyt noutamaan häntä. 
He ottivat karjansa ja kaiken muun omaisuutensa, jonka olivat
Kanaaninmaassa hankkineet, ja niin Jaakob ja koko hänen sukunsa
tulivat Egyptiin.
Jaakob vei kaikki poikansa ja pojanpoikansa, tyttärensä ja poikiensa
tyttäret, koko sukunsa mukanaan Egyptiin.
Nämä ovat Egyptiin tulleiden israelilaisten, Jaakobin jälkeläisten,
nimet: Jaakobin esikoinen oli Ruuben,
ja Ruubenin pojat olivat Henok, Pallu,
Hesron ja Karmi. 
Simeonin pojat olivat Jemuel,
Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Sohar ja Saul, jonka äiti oli
kanaanilainen. 
Leevin pojat olivat Gerson, Kehat
ja Merari. 
Juudan pojat olivat Er, Onan, Sela, Peres ja Serah. Er ja Onan olivat
kuolleet Kanaaninmaassa. Peresin pojat olivat Hesron ja Hamul.
Isaskarin pojat olivat Tola, Puvva, Jasub ja
Simron. 
Sebulonin pojat olivat Sered, Elon ja
Jahleel. 
Tässä olivat Lean pojat, jotka hän oli
synnyttänyt Jaakobille Mesopotamiassa, ja näiden
poikien pojat. Mesopotamiassa Lealle oli syntynyt
myös tytär Dina. Näitä Jaakobin jälkeläisiä, poikia
ja tyttäriä, oli kolmekymmentäkolme.
Gadin pojat olivat Sifjon, Haggi, Suni, Esbon,
Eri, Arodi ja Areli. 
Asserin pojat olivat Jimna,
Jisva, Jisvi ja Beria, ja heillä oli sisar Sera.
Berian pojat olivat Heber ja Malkiel. 
Näiden
kuudentoista Jaakobin jälkeläisen kantaäiti oli
Silpa, jonka Laban oli antanut orjattareksi tyttärelleen Lealle.
Jaakobin vaimon Raakelin pojat olivat Joosef ja
Benjamin. 
Joosefille syntyivät Egyptissä pojat
Manasse ja Efraim, ja heidät synnytti Asenat, Onin
papin Poti-Feran tytär. 
Benjaminin pojat olivat
Bela, Beker, Asbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Ros, Muppim,
Huppim ja Ard. 
Näitä Jaakobille syntyneitä
jälkeläisiä, joiden kantaäiti oli Raakel, oli
neljätoista.
Danin poika oli Husim. 
Naftalin pojat olivat
Jahseel, Guni, Jeser ja Sillem. 
Näiden seitsemän
Jaakobin jälkeläisen kantaäiti oli Bilha, jonka
Laban oli antanut orjattareksi tyttärelleen Raakelille.
Jaakobin jälkeläisiä, jotka tulivat hänen
mukanaan Egyptiin, oli kaikkiaan kuusikymmentäkuusi
henkeä, ja vielä lisäksi hänen poikiensa vaimot.
Joosefin poikia, jotka olivat syntyneet hänelle Egyptissä, oli
kaksi. Näin oli Jaakobin sukuun kuuluvia tullut Egyptiin kaikkiaan
seitsemänkymmentä henkeä.
Jaakob lähetti Juudan edellään Joosefin luo
ilmoittamaan heidän saapumisestaan Goseniin. Niin he
tulivat Gosenin maakuntaan, 
ja Joosef
valjastutti vaununsa ja lähti sinne isäänsä Israelia
vastaan. Heti kun hän näki Jaakobin, hän riensi
syleilemään häntä ja itki pitkään hänen olkaansa
vasten. 
Israel sanoi Joosefille: "Nyt voin
kuolla rauhassa! Olen nähnyt sinut ja tiedän, että
sinä olet elossa!"
Sitten Joosef sanoi veljilleen ja isänsä koko
väelle: "Nyt minun täytyy palata faraon luo
kertomaan, että veljeni ja isäni, jotka asuivat
Kanaaninmaassa, ovat tulleet luokseni. 
Sanon
hänelle, että te olette paimenia, olette aina olleet
karjankasvattajia ja olette nyt tuoneet tänne
lampaanne, vuohenne, nautakarjanne ja kaiken muun
omaisuutenne. 
Kun sitten farao kutsuu teidät
luokseen ja kysyy, mikä teidän ammattinne on,
niin sanokaa: 'Me, sinun palvelijasi, olemme
olleet karjankasvattajia nuoruudestamme tähän
päivään saakka, kuten esi-isämmekin.' Silloin saatte
jäädä asumaan Goseniin, sillä egyptiläiset eivät
siedä keskuudessaan paimentolaisia, joilla on
lampaita ja vuohia."
Joosef meni faraon luo ja sanoi: "Isäni ja
veljeni ovat tulleet tänne Kanaaninmaasta ja tuoneet
mukanaan lampaansa, vuohensa, nautakarjansa ja koko
muun omaisuutensa. He ovat nyt Gosenin maakunnassa."
Sitten hän otti mukaansa viisi veljeään ja vei
heidät faraon eteen. 
Farao kysyi hänen veljiltään: "Mikä on teidän ammattinne?" He vastasivat
faraolle: "Me, sinun palvelijasi, olemme
lammaspaimenia, kuten esi-isämmekin olivat." 
He
sanoivat vielä faraolle: "Me jouduimme tulemaan
siirtolaisiksi tähän maahan, sillä lampaillamme ja
vuohillamme ei ole Kanaaninmaassa syötävää, kun
siellä on kova kuivuus. Sallithan, että me, sinun
palvelijasi, asetumme asumaan Gosenin maakuntaan."
Farao sanoi Joosefille: "Isäsi ja veljesi ovat
tulleet luoksesi. 
Egyptin maa on sinulle avoinna,
sijoita heidät asumaan maan parhaaseen osaan. He
saavat asua Gosenin maakunnassa, ja jos heidän
joukossaan on kyvykkäitä miehiä, niin pane heidät
päällysmiehiksi huolehtimaan minun karjoistani."
Sitten Joosef haki isänsä ja toi hänet faraon
eteen, ja Jaakob tervehti faraota toivottaen hänelle
siunausta. 
Farao kysyi Jaakobilta: "Paljonko sinulla on ikää?" 
Jaakob vastasi: "Olen elänyt
vaeltajan elämää satakolmekymmentä vuotta.
Vähälukuiset ja onnettomat ovat elinvuoteni olleet,
eikä niitä ole kertynyt minulle yhtä paljon kuin
esi-isilleni heidän vaelluksensa aikana." 
Sitten
Jaakob hyvästeli faraon, toivotti hänelle siunausta
ja lähti hänen luotaan.
Joosef sijoitti isänsä ja veljensä Egyptiin asumaan ja antoi heille
maaomaisuutta maan parhaasta osasta, Ramseksen maakunnasta, kuten
farao oli käskenyt.
Ja Joosef piti huolen isänsä ja veljiensä
ja koko suvun elatuksesta antaen kullekin sen mukaan, montako ruokittavaa hänellä oli.
Missään ei ollut syötävää, sillä nälänhätä oli
hyvin ankara, ja Egypti ja Kanaaninmaa olivat nääntymässä nälkään. 
Joosef kokosi Egyptistä ja Kanaaninmaasta kaiken hopean maksuksi siitä viljasta,
joka häneltä ostettiin, ja vei hopean faraon palatsiin. 
Kun hopea oli loppunut Egyptistä ja Kanaaninmaasta, tulivat
egyptiläiset Joosefin luo ja sanoivat: "Anna meille leipää! Pitääkö
meidän kuolla sinun eteesi, nyt kun hopea on lopussa?"
Silloin
Joosef vastasi: "Tuokaa tänne karjanne, niin minä
annan teille syötävää eläimiänne vastaan, jos kerran
hopeanne on lopussa." 
He toivat karjansa Joosefille, ja hän antoi heille syötävää hevosten,
lampaiden ja vuohien, nautakarjan ja aasien hinnalla.  Näin hän sinä
vuonna piti heidät hengissä ruoalla, jonka he saivat karjaansa
vastaan.
Niin kului se vuosi. He tulivat hänen luokseen
seuraavanakin vuonna ja sanoivat: "Herramme, sinä
tiedät varmaan, että kaikki hopea on lopussa, ja
myös meidän karjamme ja juhtamme ovat jo joutuneet
sinun haltuusi. Meillä ei ole sinulle enää muuta
tarjottavaa kuin ruumiimme ja peltomme. 
Pitääkö
meidän peltoinemme tuhoutua sinun edessäsi? Ota
meidät ja meidän peltomme ja anna meille leipää,
niin me tulemme faraon orjiksi, ja anna meille myös
siemenviljaa. Näin me pysymme hengissä eivätkä pellot autioidu."
Niin Joosef osti koko Egyptin pellot faraolle,
sillä kaikki egyptiläiset myivät hänelle peltonsa,
kun nälkä oli käynyt heille ylivoimaiseksi. Näin
koko maa tuli faraon omaksi. 
Joosef teki
kansasta faraon orjia kautta koko Egyptin maan.
Vain pappien peltoja hän ei ostanut, sillä papit
saivat palkkansa faraolta ja pystyivät elämään
häneltä saamillaan tuloilla. Siksi heidän ei
tarvinnut myydä peltojaan.
Joosef sanoi kansalle: "Minä olen nyt ostanut
teidät ja teidän peltonne faraolle. Tässä on teille
siemenviljaa, kylväkää peltonne. 
Mutta sadosta
teidän on aina annettava viidesosa faraolle. Neljä
viidesosaa siitä jääköön teille siemenviljaksi sekä
ravinnoksi itsellenne, talonväellenne, vaimoillenne
ja lapsillenne." 
He sanoivat: "Sinä olet pitänyt
meidät hengissä. Pidä meistä huolta edelleenkin,
niin me olemme faraon orjia." 
Ja Joosef sääti
lain, joka vielä nytkin on voimassa Egyptissä, että
faraolle oli annettava viidesosa sadosta. Vain
pappien pellot eivät joutuneet faraon omistukseen.
Niin israelilaiset jäivät asumaan Egyptiin Gosenin maakuntaan ja
kotiutuivat sinne. He olivat hedelmällisiä ja lisääntyivät runsaasti.
Jaakob asui Egyptissä seitsemäntoista vuotta, ja hän eli
sadanneljänkymmenenseitsemän vuoden ikäiseksi.
Kun hän, Israel, tunsi kuolemansa lähestyvän,
hän kutsui luokseen poikansa Joosefin ja sanoi
hänelle: "Pyydän sinulta erästä asiaa, jolla voit
osoittaa minulle rakkautesi ja uskollisuutesi.
Kosketa minua nivusiin ja vanno, ettet hautaa minua
Egyptiin. 
Kun minä olen mennyt lepoon isieni
luo, vie minun ruumiini pois Egyptistä ja pane minut
isieni hautaan." Joosef vastasi: "Minä teen niin
kuin pyydät." 
Jaakob sanoi: "Vanno se minulle."  Joosef vannoi, ja sitten Israel
polvistui vuoteelleen ja rukoili kasvot päänalusta vasten.
Jonkin aikaa tämän jälkeen Joosefille
ilmoitettiin, että hänen isänsä oli sairaana. Joosef
lähti hänen luokseen ja otti mukaan molemmat
poikansa, Manassen ja Efraimin.
Kun Jaakob sai tietää, että hänen poikansa Joosef
oli tullut, hän kokosi voimansa ja nousi istumaan
vuoteessa. 
Hän sanoi Joosefille: "Jumala, Kaikkivaltias, ilmestyi minulle Lusissa
Kanaaninmaassa, siunasi minut
ja sanoi minulle: 'Minä teen sinut
hedelmälliseksi ja jälkeläisesi monilukuisiksi, niin
että sinusta saavat alkunsa monet kansat, ja annan
sinun jälkeläisillesi tämän maan pysyväksi perintömaaksi.' 
Ja nyt sinun kaksi poikaasi, jotka
olivat syntyneet Egyptissä jo ennen minun tänne
tuloani, ovat minun poikiani. Olkoot Efraim ja
Manasse minulle kuin Ruuben ja Simeon! 
Sinun muut
lapsesi, jotka ovat syntyneet heidän jälkeensä,
olkoot sinun omiasi, mutta heitä kutsuttakoon
veljiensä heimojen mukaan siinä maassa, jonka he
saavat periä. 
Kun minä olin palaamassa
Mesopotamiasta, menetin matkan aikana sinun äitisi
Raakelin. Se tapahtui Kanaaninmaassa, kun Efrataan
oli vielä jonkin verran matkaa, ja minä hautasin
hänet sinne Efratan tien varteen." Efrata on sama
kuin Betlehem.
Huomatessaan Joosefin pojat Jaakob kysyi: "Keitä
nämä ovat?" 
Joosef vastasi: "He ovat minun
poikiani, jotka Jumala on antanut minulle täällä
Egyptissä." Silloin Jaakob sanoi: "Tuo heidät tänne,
että saan siunata heidät." 
Jaakobin silmät
olivat näet käyneet iän mukana heikoiksi, eikä hän
enää nähnyt hyvin. Joosef toi pojat hänen luokseen,
ja hän suuteli ja syleili heitä. 
Joosefille
Israel sanoi: "En osannut toivoa, että saisin vielä
kerran nähdä kasvosi, ja nyt Jumala on antanut minun
nähdä myös sinun poikasi!" 
Ja Joosef otti pojat
pois hänen jalkojensa juuresta ja kumartui
kasvoilleen maahan saakka.
Sitten Joosef ohjasi Efraimin oikealla kädellään
Israelin vasemmalle puolelle ja Manassen vasemmalla
kädellään Israelin oikealle puolelle ja vei heidät
näin hänen eteensä. 
Israel ojensi oikean
kätensä, mutta asetti sen Efraimin pään päälle,
vaikka tämä oli nuorempi, ja vasemman kätensä hän
pani Manassen päälle; hän asetti siis kätensä
ristikkäin. Mutta Manasse oli esikoinen. 
Ja
Israel siunasi Joosefin sanoen:
-- Jumala, jonka tahdon mukaisesti
minun isäni Abraham ja Iisak ovat vaeltaneet,
Jumala, joka on ollut minun paimeneni
syntymästäni tähän päivään saakka,
se enkeli, joka on minut pelastanut
kaikesta onnettomuudesta,
siunatkoon näitä nuorukaisia.
Heidän kauttaan säilyköön minun nimeni
ja minun isieni Abrahamin ja Iisakin nimi.
Lukuisat olkoot heidän jälkeläisensä maan päällä.
Kun Joosef näki, että hänen isänsä pani oikean
kätensä Efraimin pään päälle, se oli hänestä väärin,
ja hän tarttui isänsä käteen siirtääkseen sen Manassen pään päälle. 
Hän sanoi isälleen: "Ei noin,
isäni, tämä tässä on esikoinen. Pane oikea kätesi
hänen päänsä päälle." 
Mutta isä ei suostunut, vaan sanoi: "Tiedän, poikani, tiedän. Myös
Manassesta on tuleva kokonainen kansa, ja hänkin on kasvava
mahtavaksi, mutta hänen nuorempi veljensä tulee vielä mahtavammaksi ja
hänen jälkeläisistään kasvaa kansojen paljous."
Ja hän siunasi heidät sinä
päivänä sanoen: "Siunatessaan israelilaiset lausuvat
teidän nimenne ja sanovat: 'Jumala tehköön sinut
Efraimin ja Manassen veroiseksi.'" Niin hän asetti
Efraimin Manassen edelle.
Sitten Israel sanoi Joosefille: "Minä kuolen
pian, mutta Jumala on oleva teidän kanssanne. Hän on
johdattava teidät takaisin isienne maahan. 
Ja
sen lisäksi, mitä veljesi saavat, minä annan sinulle
sen harjanteen
, jonka olen miekkani ja jouseni
voimalla ottanut amorilaisilta."
»Harjanne», hepreaksi  ekem, voi merkitä myös Sikemin kaupunkia
Jaakob kutsui poikansa luokseen ja sanoi: "Tulkaa
tänne, niin ilmoitan teille, mitä teille tapahtuu
tulevina aikoina."
-- Tulkaa koolle ja kuunnelkaa,
te Jaakobin pojat,
kuulkaa isäänne Israelia.
Ruuben, sinä olet esikoiseni ja voimani,
sinä olet miehuuteni ensimmäinen hedelmä,
arvossa korkein, voimilta väkevin.
Mutta olet kuin kuohuva puro,
siksi et säilytä ensimmäistä sijaasi.
Sinä nousit isäsi vuoteelle,
häpäisit minun makuusijani.
Simeon ja Leevi ovat veljekset,
väkivaltaisia ovat heidän hankkeensa.
Minä en suostu heidän juoniinsa,
minun sydämeni ei liity heidän seuraansa.
He ovat vihassaan tappaneet miehiä,
omin luvin katkoneet sonnien kinnerjänteet.
Kirottu olkoon heidän vihansa, sillä se on
kiivas,
heidän raivonsa, sillä se on julma.
Minä sirotan heidät Jaakobin heimojen sekaan,
hajotan heidät Israelin joukkoon.
Juuda
, veljesi ylistävät sinua.
Sinun kätesi on iskevä vihollistasi niskaan,
sinun isäsi pojat kumartavat sinua.
Juuda, sinä nuori leijona,
saaliilta olet noussut, poikani.
Hän on kyyristynyt, käynyt makuulle
kuin leijona, kuin jalopeura.
Kuka uskaltaa häntä häiritä?
Ei siirry valtikka pois Juudalta,
ei käskijän sauva hänen suvultaan.
Hänen heimostaan on tuleva se, jolla on valta,
häntä kansat tottelevat.
Viiniköynnökseen hän sitoo aasinsa,
jaloon köynnökseen aasinsa varsan.
Hän pesee viinissä vaatteensa,
rypäleiden veressä pukunsa.
Hänen silmissään on viinin hehku,
hänen hampaissaan maidon valkeus.
Sebulon on asuva meren äärellä,
hän asettuu rannikolle, missä laivat kulkevat,
hänen selkänsä taa jää Sidon.
Isaskar on vahvaluinen juhta,
joka makaa kuormaansa odottaen.
Hän näki asuinsijansa hyväksi
ja maansa ihanaksi.
Hän painoi olkansa taakan alle,
kävi tekemään orjan töitä.
Dan
on ajava kansansa asiaa
yhtenä Israelin heimoista.
Dan on oleva käärmeenä tiellä, polulla kyynä,
joka puree hevosta vuohiseen,
niin että ratsastaja suistuu maahan.
Herra, sinulta minä odotan pelastusta!
Gadia
ahdistavat rosvojen joukot,
ja Gad ahdistaa niitä,
seuraa niiden kintereillä.
Asserin leipä on runsas,
hän tarjoaa kuninkaiden herkkuja.
Naftali on vapaana juokseva kauris,
kauniita ovat hänen vasansa.
Joosef on hedelmäpuu,
nuori hedelmäpuu lähteen äärellä,
sen oksat ojentuvat yli muurin.
Jousimiehet hätyyttävät häntä,
he ampuvat ja ahdistavat häntä,
mutta hänen jousensa pysyy jäntevänä
ja hänen kätensä ovat nopeat.
Tämän saa aikaan Jaakobin Väkevä,
hän, jonka nimi on Paimen,
Israelin Kallio,
isäsi Jumala, joka on auttava sinua,
Kaikkivaltias, joka siunaa sinua,
antaa siunauksia ylhäältä taivaasta
ja siunauksia syvyyksistä maan alta,
siunauksia kohduille ja rinnoille.
Isäsi siunaukset ovat vahvemmat kuin ikivanhat
vuoret,
kuin ihanat ikuiset kukkulat.
Ne siunaukset tulkoot Joosefin osaksi,
hänen, joka on päämies veljiensä joukossa.
Benjamin on saalistava susi,
aamuisin hänellä on aina syötävää,
ja iltaisin hän jakaa saalista.
Nämä ovat Israelin heimot ja niiden kantaisät,
kaikkiaan kaksitoista, ja näin puhui heille heidän
isänsä Jaakob, kun hän siunasi heidät. Kullekin
heistä hän lausui siunauksen.
Sitten Jaakob antoi heille nämä ohjeet: "Minut
otetaan pian esi-isieni luo. Haudatkaa minut isieni
viereen siihen luolaan, joka on heettiläisen Efronin
vainiolla, 
Makpelan vainiolla, Mamren lähistöllä
Kanaaninmaassa. Sen vainion Abraham osti heettiläiseltä Efronilta sukuhaudaksi. 
Siihen hautaan on
haudattu Abraham ja hänen vaimonsa Saara, sinne on
haudattu Iisak ja hänen vaimonsa Rebekka, ja sinne
minä hautasin Lean. 
Se vainio ja siellä oleva
luola on ostettu heettiläisiltä."
Kun Jaakob oli antanut nämä ohjeet pojilleen,
hän paneutui taas vuoteeseen. Hän kuoli, ja hänet
otettiin isiensä luo.
Nimi Juuda muistuttaa heprean sanaa jodu 'he ylistävät', vrt. 
Nimi Dan merkitsee 'hän tuomitsee, johtaa, ajaa asiaa'. 
Nimi Gad, joka varsinaisesti merkitsee 'hyvä onni', muistuttaa myös
heprean sanoja gad 'ahdistaa' ja gedud 'rosvojoukko'.
Joosef kumartui itkien isänsä ylle ja suuteli
hänen kasvojaan. 
Sitten hän antoi isänsä Israelin
balsamoinnin omien lääkäriensä tehtäväksi, ja he
balsamoivat Israelin ruumiin. 
Balsamointi kesti
neljäkymmentä päivää; se oli tähän työhön tarvittava
aika. Egyptiläiset surivat häntä seitsemänkymmentä
päivää.
Kun suruaika oli ohi, Joosef sanoi faraon hoviväelle: "Pyydän teitä
kertomaan faraolle,
että
isäni vannotti minua sanoen: 'Minä kuolen pian.
Hautaa minut omaan hautaani, jonka olen teettänyt
itselleni Kanaaninmaassa.' Nyt tahtoisin mennä sinne
hautaamaan isäni. Sen jälkeen palaan taas tänne."
Farao vastasi: "Mene hautaamaan isäsi, niin kuin
hän sinua vannotti." 
Niin Joosef lähti hautaamaan
isäänsä, ja hänen mukanaan lähtivät kaikki faraon
hovimiehet, hänen hovinsa vanhimmat, kaikki Egyptin
vanhimmat, 
Joosefin perhe, kaikki hänen veljensä
sekä koko hänen isänsä suku. Vain vaimot ja lapset
sekä lampaat, vuohet ja nautakarjan he jättivät
Gosenin maakuntaan. 
Joosefilla oli mukanaan myös
vaunuja ja ajomiehiä; heitä oli hyvin suuri karavaani.
He tulivat Goren-Atadiin, joka on Jordanin
tuolla puolen, ja viettivät siellä suuret ja
juhlavat valittajaiset. Surumenot kestivät seitsemän
päivää. 
Kun maan kanaanilaiset asukkaat näkivät
Goren-Atadin surujuhlan, he sanoivat:
"Egyptiläisillä on siellä mahtavat hautajaiset!"
Siitä tämä paikka sai nimekseen Abel-Misraim.
Paikka on Jordanin tuolla puolen.
Jaakobin pojat tekivät isälleen niin kuin hän
oli käskenyt: 
he veivät hänet Kanaaninmaahan ja
hautasivat hänet Mamren lähistölle Makpelan vainion
luolaan. Makpelan vainion Abraham oli ostanut
sukuhautansa paikaksi heettiläiseltä Efronilta.
Haudattuaan isänsä Joosef palasi Egyptiin
veljiensä sekä kaikkien muiden kanssa, jotka olivat
olleet hänen mukanaan.
Joosefin veljet alkoivat isänsä kuoltua pelätä
ja sanoivat toisilleen: "Entäpä jos Joosef nyt
kääntyy meitä vastaan ja sittenkin kostaa meille
kaiken sen pahan, minkä me hänelle teimme?" 
Ja
he lähettivät Joosefille sanan: "Ennen kuolemaansa
isämme käski meitä 
sanomaan sinulle näin: 'Anna
veljillesi anteeksi heidän rikoksensa ja pahat
tekonsa. Armahda heitä, vaikka he ovatkin tehneet
sinulle pahaa.' Anna siis meille nyt anteeksi meidän
rikoksemme. Mehän palvelemme samaa Jumalaa kuin
isäsi." Kuullessaan heidän sanansa Joosef puhkesi
itkuun.
Sitten veljet tulivat, lankesivat hänen eteensä
ja sanoivat: "Me rupeamme vaikka sinun orjiksesi!"
Mutta Joosef sanoi heille: "Älkää olko
peloissanne, enhän minä ole Jumala. 
Te kyllä
tarkoititte minulle pahaa, mutta Jumala käänsi sen
hyväksi. Hän antoi tämän kaiken tapahtua, jotta
monet ihmiset saisivat jäädä henkiin. 
Älkää siis
enää olko peloissanne. Minä huolehdin teistä, teidän
vaimoistanne ja lapsistanne." Näin hän rauhoitteli
heitä ja puhui heille lempeästi.
Joosef ja hänen isänsä suku jäivät Egyptiin
asumaan, ja Joosef eli sadankymmenen vuoden ikäiseksi. 
Hän sai nähdä Efraimin lapsia ja lastenlapsia, ja myös
Manassen pojalle Makirille syntyi lapsia, jotka Joosef ehti nähdä.
Joosef sanoi veljilleen: "Minä kuolen pian,
mutta Jumala pitää teistä hyvän huolen ja vie teidät
tästä maasta siihen maahan, jonka hän vannoi
antavansa Abrahamille, Iisakille ja Jaakobille."
Sitten Joosef vannotti Israelin poikia ja sanoi:
"Kun Jumala aikanaan johtaa teidät pois täältä, niin
viekää minun luuni mukananne."
Joosef kuoli sadankymmenen vuoden ikäisenä, ja
hänet balsamoitiin ja pantiin arkkuun Egyptissä.
Au commencement, Dieu créa les cieux et la terre.
La terre était informe et vide: il y avait des ténèbres à la surface de l'abîme, et l'esprit de Dieu se mouvait au-dessus des eaux.
Dieu dit: Que la lumière soit! Et la lumière fut.
Dieu vit que la lumière était bonne; et Dieu sépara la lumière d'avec les ténèbres.
Dieu appela la lumière jour, et il appela les ténèbres nuit. Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le premier jour.
Dieu dit: Qu'il y ait une étendue entre les eaux, et qu'elle sépare les eaux d'avec les eaux.
Et Dieu fit l'étendue, et il sépara les eaux qui sont au-dessous de l'étendue d'avec les eaux qui sont au-dessus de l'étendue. Et cela fut ainsi.
Dieu appela l'étendue ciel. Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le second jour.
Dieu dit: Que les eaux qui sont au-dessous du ciel se rassemblent en un seul lieu, et que le sec paraisse. Et cela fut ainsi.
Dieu appela le sec terre, et il appela l'amas des eaux mers. Dieu vit que cela était bon.
Puis Dieu dit: Que la terre produise de la verdure, de l'herbe portant de la semence, des arbres fruitiers donnant du fruit selon leur espèce et ayant en eux leur semence sur la terre. Et cela fut ainsi.
La terre produisit de la verdure, de l'herbe portant de la semence selon son espèce, et des arbres donnant du fruit et ayant en eux leur semence selon leur espèce. Dieu vit que cela était bon.
Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le troisième jour.
Dieu dit: Qu'il y ait des luminaires dans l'étendue du ciel, pour séparer le jour d'avec la nuit; que ce soient des signes pour marquer les époques, les jours et les années;
et qu'ils servent de luminaires dans l'étendue du ciel, pour éclairer la terre. Et cela fut ainsi.
Dieu fit les deux grands luminaires, le plus grand luminaire pour présider au jour, et le plus petit luminaire pour présider à la nuit; il fit aussi les étoiles.
Dieu les plaça dans l'étendue du ciel, pour éclairer la terre,
pour présider au jour et à la nuit, et pour séparer la lumière d'avec les ténèbres. Dieu vit que cela était bon.
Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le quatrième jour.
Dieu dit: Que les eaux produisent en abondance des animaux vivants, et que des oiseaux volent sur la terre vers l'étendue du ciel.
Dieu créa les grands poissons et tous les animaux vivants qui se meuvent, et que les eaux produisirent en abondance selon leur espèce; il créa aussi tout oiseau ailé selon son espèce. Dieu vit que cela était bon.
Dieu les bénit, en disant: Soyez féconds, multipliez, et remplissez les eaux des mers; et que les oiseaux multiplient sur la terre.
Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le cinquième jour.
Dieu dit: Que la terre produise des animaux vivants selon leur espèce, du bétail, des reptiles et des animaux terrestres, selon leur espèce. Et cela fut ainsi.
Dieu fit les animaux de la terre selon leur espèce, le bétail selon son espèce, et tous les reptiles de la terre selon leur espèce. Dieu vit que cela était bon.
Puis Dieu dit: Faisons l'homme à notre image, selon notre ressemblance, et qu'il domine sur les poissons de la mer, sur les oiseaux du ciel, sur le bétail, sur toute la terre, et sur tous les reptiles qui rampent sur la terre.
Dieu créa l'homme à son image, il le créa à l'image de Dieu, il créa l'homme et la femme.
Dieu les bénit, et Dieu leur dit: Soyez féconds, multipliez, remplissez la terre, et l'assujettissez; et dominez sur les poissons de la mer, sur les oiseaux du ciel, et sur tout animal qui se meut sur la terre.
Et Dieu dit: Voici, je vous donne toute herbe portant de la semence et qui est à la surface de toute la terre, et tout arbre ayant en lui du fruit d'arbre et portant de la semence: ce sera votre nourriture.
Et à tout animal de la terre, à tout oiseau du ciel, et à tout ce qui se meut sur la terre, ayant en soi un souffle de vie, je donne toute herbe verte pour nourriture. Et cela fut ainsi.
Dieu vit tout ce qu'il avait fait et voici, cela était très bon. Ainsi, il y eut un soir, et il y eut un matin: ce fut le sixième jour.
Ainsi furent achevés les cieux et la terre, et toute leur armée.
Dieu acheva au septième jour son oeuvre, qu'il avait faite: et il se reposa au septième jour de toute son oeuvre, qu'il avait faite.
Dieu bénit le septième jour, et il le sanctifia, parce qu'en ce jour il se reposa de toute son oeuvre qu'il avait créée en la faisant.
Voici les origines des cieux et de la terre, quand ils furent créés.
Lorsque l'éternel Dieu fit une terre et des cieux, aucun arbuste des champs n'était encore sur la terre, et aucune herbe des champs ne germait encore: car l'éternel Dieu n'avait pas fait pleuvoir sur la terre, et il n'y avait point d'homme pour cultiver le sol.
Mais une vapeur s'éleva de la terre, et arrosa toute la surface du sol.
L'éternel Dieu forma l'homme de la poussière de la terre, il souffla dans ses narines un souffle de vie et l'homme devint un être vivant.
Puis l'éternel Dieu planta un jardin en éden, du côté de l'orient, et il y mit l'homme qu'il avait formé.
L'éternel Dieu fit pousser du sol des arbres de toute espèce, agréables à voir et bons à manger, et l'arbre de la vie au milieu du jardin, et l'arbre de la connaissance du bien et du mal.
Un fleuve sortait d'éden pour arroser le jardin, et de là il se divisait en quatre bras.
Le nom du premier est Pischon; c'est celui qui entoure tout le pays de Havila, où se trouve l'or.
L'or de ce pays est pur; on y trouve aussi le bdellium et la pierre d'onyx.
Le nom du second fleuve est Guihon; c'est celui qui entoure tout le pays de Cusch.
Le nom du troisième est Hiddékel; c'est celui qui coule à l'orient de l'Assyrie. Le quatrième fleuve, c'est l'Euphrate.
L'éternel Dieu prit l'homme, et le plaça dans le jardin d'éden pour le cultiver et pour le garder.
L'éternel Dieu donna cet ordre à l'homme: Tu pourras manger de tous les arbres du jardin;
mais tu ne mangeras pas de l'arbre de la connaissance du bien et du mal, car le jour où tu en mangeras, tu mourras.
L'éternel Dieu dit: Il n'est pas bon que l'homme soit seul; je lui ferai une aide semblable à lui.
L'éternel Dieu forma de la terre tous les animaux des champs et tous les oiseaux du ciel, et il les fit venir vers l'homme, pour voir comment il les appellerait, et afin que tout être vivant portât le nom que lui donnerait l'homme.
Et l'homme donna des noms à tout le bétail, aux oiseaux du ciel et à tous les animaux des champs; mais, pour l'homme, il ne trouva point d'aide semblable à lui.
Alors l'éternel Dieu fit tomber un profond sommeil sur l'homme, qui s'endormit; il prit une de ses côtes, et referma la chair à sa place.
L'éternel Dieu forma une femme de la côte qu'il avait prise de l'homme, et il l'amena vers l'homme.
Et l'homme dit: Voici cette fois celle qui est os de mes os et chair de ma chair! on l'appellera femme, parce qu'elle a été prise de l'homme.
C'est pourquoi l'homme quittera son père et sa mère, et s'attachera à sa femme, et ils deviendront une seule chair.
L'homme et sa femme étaient tous deux nus, et ils n'en avaient point honte.
Le serpent était le plus rusé de tous les animaux des champs, que l'éternel Dieu avait faits. Il dit à la femme: Dieu a-t-il réellement dit: Vous ne mangerez pas de tous les arbres du jardin?
La femme répondit au serpent: Nous mangeons du fruit des arbres du jardin.
Mais quant au fruit de l'arbre qui est au milieu du jardin, Dieu a dit: Vous n'en mangerez point et vous n'y toucherez point, de peur que vous ne mouriez.
Alors le serpent dit à la femme: Vous ne mourrez point;
mais Dieu sait que, le jour où vous en mangerez, vos yeux s'ouvriront, et que vous serez comme des dieux, connaissant le bien et le mal.
La femme vit que l'arbre était bon à manger et agréable à la vue, et qu'il était précieux pour ouvrir l'intelligence; elle prit de son fruit, et en mangea; elle en donna aussi à son mari, qui était auprès d'elle, et il en mangea.
Les yeux de l'un et de l'autre s'ouvrirent, ils connurent qu'ils étaient nus, et ayant cousu des feuilles de figuier, ils s'en firent des ceintures.
Alors ils entendirent la voix de l'éternel Dieu, qui parcourait le jardin vers le soir, et l'homme et sa femme se cachèrent loin de la face de l'éternel Dieu, au milieu des arbres du jardin.
Mais l'éternel Dieu appela l'homme, et lui dit: Où es-tu?
Il répondit: J'ai entendu ta voix dans le jardin, et j'ai eu peur, parce que je suis nu, et je me suis caché.
Et l'éternel Dieu dit: Qui t'a appris que tu es nu? Est-ce que tu as mangé de l'arbre dont je t'avais défendu de manger?
L'homme répondit: La femme que tu as mise auprès de moi m'a donné de l'arbre, et j'en ai mangé.
Et l'éternel Dieu dit à la femme: Pourquoi as-tu fait cela? La femme répondit: Le serpent m'a séduite, et j'en ai mangé.
L'éternel Dieu dit au serpent: Puisque tu as fait cela, tu seras maudit entre tout le bétail et entre tous les animaux des champs, tu marcheras sur ton ventre, et tu mangeras de la poussière tous les jours de ta vie.
Je mettrai inimitié entre toi et la femme, entre ta postérité et sa postérité: celle-ci t'écrasera la tête, et tu lui blesseras le talon.
Il dit à la femme: J'augmenterai la souffrance de tes grossesses, tu enfanteras avec douleur, et tes désirs se porteront vers ton mari, mais il dominera sur toi.
Il dit à l'homme: Puisque tu as écouté la voix de ta femme, et que tu as mangé de l'arbre au sujet duquel je t'avais donné cet ordre: Tu n'en mangeras point! le sol sera maudit à cause de toi. C'est à force de peine que tu en tireras ta nourriture tous les jours de ta vie,
il te produira des épines et des ronces, et tu mangeras de l'herbe des champs.
C'est à la sueur de ton visage que tu mangeras du pain, jusqu'à ce que tu retournes dans la terre, d'où tu as été pris; car tu es poussière, et tu retourneras dans la poussière.
Adam donna à sa femme le nom d'Eve: car elle a été la mère de tous les vivants.
L'éternel Dieu fit à Adam et à sa femme des habits de peau, et il les en revêtit.
L'éternel Dieu dit: Voici, l'homme est devenu comme l'un de nous, pour la connaissance du bien et du mal. Empêchons-le maintenant d'avancer sa main, de prendre de l'arbre de vie, d'en manger, et de vivre éternellement.
Et l'éternel Dieu le chassa du jardin d'éden, pour qu'il cultivât la terre, d'où il avait été pris.
C'est ainsi qu'il chassa Adam; et il mit à l'orient du jardin d'éden les chérubins qui agitent une épée flamboyante, pour garder le chemin de l'arbre de vie.
Adam connut Eve, sa femme; elle conçut, et enfanta Caïn et elle dit: J'ai formé un homme avec l'aide de l'éternel.
Elle enfanta encore son frère Abel. Abel fut berger, et Caïn fut laboureur.
Au bout de quelque temps, Caïn fit à l'éternel une offrande des fruits de la terre;
et Abel, de son côté, en fit une des premiers-nés de son troupeau et de leur graisse. L'éternel porta un regard favorable sur Abel et sur son offrande;
mais il ne porta pas un regard favorable sur Caïn et sur son offrande. Caïn fut très irrité, et son visage fut abattu.
Et l'éternel dit à Caïn: Pourquoi es-tu irrité, et pourquoi ton visage est-il abattu?
Certainement, si tu agis bien, tu relèveras ton visage, et si tu agis mal, le péché se couche à la porte, et ses désirs se portent vers toi: mais toi, domine sur lui.
Cependant, Caïn adressa la parole à son frère Abel; mais, comme ils étaient dans les champs, Caïn se jeta sur son frère Abel, et le tua.
L'éternel dit à Caïn: Où est ton frère Abel? Il répondit: Je ne sais pas; suis-je le gardien de mon frère?
Et Dieu dit: Qu'as-tu fait? La voix du sang de ton frère crie de la terre jusqu'à moi.
Maintenant, tu seras maudit de la terre qui a ouvert sa bouche pour recevoir de ta main le sang de ton frère.
Quand tu cultiveras le sol, il ne te donnera plus sa richesse. Tu seras errant et vagabond sur la terre.
Caïn dit à l'éternel: Mon châtiment est trop grand pour être supporté.
Voici, tu me chasses aujourd'hui de cette terre; je serai caché loin de ta face, je serai errant et vagabond sur la terre, et quiconque me trouvera me tuera.
L'éternel lui dit: Si quelqu'un tuait Caïn, Caïn serait vengé sept fois. Et l'éternel mit un signe sur Caïn pour que quiconque le trouverait ne le tuât point.
Puis, Caïn s'éloigna de la face de l'éternel, et habita dans la terre de Nod, à l'orient d'éden.
Caïn connut sa femme; elle conçut, et enfanta Hénoc. Il bâtit ensuite une ville, et il donna à cette ville le nom de son fils Hénoc.
Hénoc engendra Irad, Irad engendra Mehujaël, Mehujaël engendra Metuschaël, et Metuschaël engendra Lémec.
Lémec prit deux femmes: le nom de l'une était Ada, et le nom de l'autre Tsilla.
Ada enfanta Jabal: il fut le père de ceux qui habitent sous des tentes et près des troupeaux.
Le nom de son frère était Jubal: il fut le père de tous ceux qui jouent de la harpe et du chalumeau.
Tsilla, de son côté, enfanta Tubal Caïn, qui forgeait tous les instruments d'airain et de fer. La soeur de Tubal Caïn était Naama.
Lémec dit à ses femmes: Ada et Tsilla, écoutez ma voix! Femmes de Lémec, écoutez ma parole! J'ai tué un homme pour ma blessure, Et un jeune homme pour ma meurtrissure.
Caïn sera vengé sept fois, Et Lémec soixante-dix-sept fois.
Adam connut encore sa femme; elle enfanta un fils, et l'appela du nom de Seth, car, dit-elle, Dieu m'a donnée un autre fils à la place d'Abel, que Caïn a tué.
Seth eut aussi un fils, et il l'appela du nom d'énosch. C'est alors que l'on commença à invoquer le nom de l'éternel.
Voici le livre de la postérité d'Adam. Lorsque Dieu créa l'homme, il le fit à la ressemblance de Dieu.
Il créa l'homme et la femme, il les bénit, et il les appela du nom d'homme, lorsqu'ils furent créés.
Adam, âgé de cent trente ans, engendra un fils à sa ressemblance, selon son image, et il lui donna le nom de Seth.
Les jours d'Adam, après la naissance de Seth, furent de huit cents ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours qu'Adam vécut furent de neuf cent trente ans; puis il mourut.
Seth, âgé de cent cinq ans, engendra énosch.
Seth vécut, après la naissance d'énosch, huit cent sept ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Seth furent de neuf cent douze ans; puis il mourut.
énosch, âgé de quatre-vingt-dix ans, engendra Kénan.
énosch vécut, après la naissance de Kénan, huit cent quinze ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours d'énosch furent de neuf cent cinq ans; puis il mourut.
Kénan, âgé de soixante-dix ans, engendra Mahalaleel.
Kénan vécut, après la naissance de Mahalaleel, huit cent quarante ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Kénan furent de neuf cent dix ans; puis il mourut.
Mahalaleel, âgé de soixante-cinq ans, engendra Jéred.
Mahalaleel vécut, après la naissance de Jéred, huit cent trente ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Mahalaleel furent de huit cent quatre-vingt-quinze ans; puis il mourut.
Jéred, âgé de cent soixante-deux ans, engendra Hénoc.
Jéred vécut, après la naissance d'Hénoc, huit cents ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Jéred furent de neuf cent soixante-deux ans; puis il mourut.
Hénoc, âgé de soixante-cinq ans, engendra Metuschélah.
Hénoc, après la naissance de Metuschélah, marcha avec Dieu trois cents ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours d'Hénoc furent de trois cent soixante-cinq ans.
Hénoc marcha avec Dieu; puis il ne fut plus, parce que Dieu le prit.
Metuschélah, âgé de cent quatre-vingt-sept ans, engendra Lémec.
Metuschélah vécut, après la naissance de Lémec, sept cent quatre-vingt deux ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Metuschélah furent de neuf cent soixante-neuf ans; puis il mourut.
Lémec, âgé de cent quatre-vingt-deux ans, engendra un fils.
Il lui donna le nom de Noé, en disant: Celui-ci nous consolera de nos fatigues et du travail pénible de nos mains, provenant de cette terre que l'éternel a maudite.
Lémec vécut, après la naissance de Noé, cinq cent quatre-vingt-quinze ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Tous les jours de Lémec furent de sept cent soixante-dix sept ans; puis il mourut.
Noé, âgé de cinq cents ans, engendra Sem, Cham et Japhet.
Lorsque les hommes eurent commencé à se multiplier sur la face de la terre, et que des filles leur furent nées,
les fils de Dieu virent que les filles des hommes étaient belles, et ils en prirent pour femmes parmi toutes celles qu'ils choisirent.
Alors l'éternel dit: Mon esprit ne restera pas à toujours dans l'homme, car l'homme n'est que chair, et ses jours seront de cent vingt ans.
Les géants étaient sur la terre en ces temps-là, après que les fils de Dieu furent venus vers les filles des hommes, et qu'elles leur eurent donné des enfants: ce sont ces héros qui furent fameux dans l'antiquité.
L'éternel vit que la méchanceté des hommes était grande sur la terre, et que toutes les pensées de leur coeur se portaient chaque jour uniquement vers le mal.
L'éternel se repentit d'avoir fait l'homme sur la terre, et il fut affligé en son coeur.
Et l'éternel dit: J'exterminerai de la face de la terre l'homme que j'ai créé, depuis l'homme jusqu'au bétail, aux reptiles, et aux oiseaux du ciel; car je me repens de les avoir faits.
Mais Noé trouva grâce aux yeux de l'éternel.
Voici la postérité de Noé. Noé était un homme juste et intègre dans son temps; Noé marchait avec Dieu.
Noé engendra trois fils: Sem, Cham et Japhet.
La terre était corrompue devant Dieu, la terre était pleine de violence.
Dieu regarda la terre, et voici, elle était corrompue; car toute chair avait corrompu sa voie sur la terre.
Alors Dieu dit à Noé: La fin de toute chair est arrêtée par devers moi; car ils ont rempli la terre de violence; voici, je vais les détruire avec la terre.
Fais-toi une arche de bois de gopher; tu disposeras cette arche en cellules, et tu l'enduiras de poix en dedans et en dehors.
Voici comment tu la feras: l'arche aura trois cents coudées de longueur, cinquante coudées de largeur et trente coudées de hauteur.
Tu feras à l'arche une fenêtre, que tu réduiras à une coudée en haut; tu établiras une porte sur le côté de l'arche; et tu construiras un étage inférieur, un second et un troisième.
Et moi, je vais faire venir le déluge d'eaux sur la terre, pour détruire toute chair ayant souffle de vie sous le ciel; tout ce qui est sur la terre périra.
Mais j'établis mon alliance avec toi; tu entreras dans l'arche, toi et tes fils, ta femme et les femmes de tes fils avec toi.
De tout ce qui vit, de toute chair, tu feras entrer dans l'arche deux de chaque espèce, pour les conserver en vie avec toi: il y aura un mâle et une femelle.
Des oiseaux selon leur espèce, du bétail selon son espèce, et de tous les reptiles de la terre selon leur espèce, deux de chaque espèce viendront vers toi, pour que tu leur conserves la vie.
Et toi, prends de tous les aliments que l'on mange, et fais-en une provision auprès de toi, afin qu'ils te servent de nourriture ainsi qu'à eux.
C'est ce que fit Noé: il exécuta tout ce que Dieu lui avait ordonné.
L'éternel dit à Noé: Entre dans l'arche, toi et toute ta maison; car je t'ai vu juste devant moi parmi cette génération.
Tu prendras auprès de toi sept couples de tous les animaux purs, le mâle et sa femelle; une paire des animaux qui ne sont pas purs, le mâle et sa femelle;
sept couples aussi des oiseaux du ciel, mâle et femelle, afin de conserver leur race en vie sur la face de toute la terre.
Car, encore sept jours, et je ferai pleuvoir sur la terre quarante jours et quarante nuits, et j'exterminerai de la face de la terre tous les êtres que j'ai faits.
Noé exécuta tout ce que l'éternel lui avait ordonné.
Noé avait six cents ans, lorsque le déluge d'eaux fut sur la terre.
Et Noé entra dans l'arche avec ses fils, sa femme et les femmes de ses fils, pour échapper aux eaux du déluge.
D'entre les animaux purs et les animaux qui ne sont pas purs, les oiseaux et tout ce qui se meut sur la terre,
il entra dans l'arche auprès de Noé, deux à deux, un mâle et une femelle, comme Dieu l'avait ordonné à Noé.
Sept jours après, les eaux du déluge furent sur la terre.
L'an six cent de la vie de Noé, le second mois, le dix-septième jour du mois, en ce jour-là toutes les sources du grand abîme jaillirent, et les écluses des cieux s'ouvrirent.
La pluie tomba sur la terre quarante jours et quarante nuits.
Ce même jour entrèrent dans l'arche Noé, Sem, Cham et Japhet, fils de Noé, la femme de Noé et les trois femmes de ses fils avec eux:
eux, et tous les animaux selon leur espèce, tout le bétail selon son espèce, tous les reptiles qui rampent sur la terre selon leur espèce, tous les oiseaux selon leur espèce, tous les petits oiseaux, tout ce qui a des ailes.
Ils entrèrent dans l'arche auprès de Noé, deux à deux, de toute chair ayant souffle de vie.
Il en entra, mâle et femelle, de toute chair, comme Dieu l'avait ordonné à Noé. Puis l'éternel ferma la porte sur lui.
Le déluge fut quarante jours sur la terre. Les eaux crûrent et soulevèrent l'arche, et elle s'éleva au-dessus de la terre.
Les eaux grossirent et s'accrurent beaucoup sur la terre, et l'arche flotta sur la surface des eaux.
Les eaux grossirent de plus en plus, et toutes les hautes montagnes qui sont sous le ciel entier furent couvertes.
Les eaux s'élevèrent de quinze coudées au-dessus des montagnes, qui furent couvertes.
Tout ce qui se mouvait sur la terre périt, tant les oiseaux que le bétail et les animaux, tout ce qui rampait sur la terre, et tous les hommes.
Tout ce qui avait respiration, souffle de vie dans ses narines, et qui était sur la terre sèche, mourut.
Tous les êtres qui étaient sur la face de la terre furent exterminés, depuis l'homme jusqu'au bétail, aux reptiles et aux oiseaux du ciel: ils furent exterminés de la terre. Il ne resta que Noé, et ce qui était avec lui dans l'arche.
Les eaux furent grosses sur la terre pendant cent cinquante jours.
Dieu se souvint de Noé, de tous les animaux et de tout le bétail qui étaient avec lui dans l'arche; et Dieu fit passer un vent sur la terre, et les eaux s'apaisèrent.
Les sources de l'abîme et les écluses des cieux furent fermées, et la pluie ne tomba plus du ciel.
Les eaux se retirèrent de dessus la terre, s'en allant et s'éloignant, et les eaux diminuèrent au bout de cent cinquante jours.
Le septième mois, le dix-septième jour du mois, l'arche s'arrêta sur les montagnes d'Ararat.
Les eaux allèrent en diminuant jusqu'au dixième mois. Le dixième mois, le premier jour du mois, apparurent les sommets des montagnes.
Au bout de quarante jours, Noé ouvrit la fenêtre qu'il avait faite à l'arche.
Il lâcha le corbeau, qui sortit, partant et revenant, jusqu'à ce que les eaux eussent séché sur la terre.
Il lâcha aussi la colombe, pour voir si les eaux avaient diminué à la surface de la terre.
Mais la colombe ne trouva aucun lieu pour poser la plante de son pied, et elle revint à lui dans l'arche, car il y avait des eaux à la surface de toute la terre. Il avança la main, la prit, et la fit rentrer auprès de lui dans l'arche.
Il attendit encore sept autres jours, et il lâcha de nouveau la colombe hors de l'arche.
La colombe revint à lui sur le soir; et voici, une feuille d'olivier arrachée était dans son bec. Noé connut ainsi que les eaux avaient diminué sur la terre.
Il attendit encore sept autres jours; et il lâcha la colombe. Mais elle ne revint plus à lui.
L'an six cent un, le premier mois, le premier jour du mois, les eaux avaient séché sur la terre. Noé ôta la couverture de l'arche: il regarda, et voici, la surface de la terre avait séché.
Le second mois, le vingt-septième jour du mois, la terre fut sèche.
Alors Dieu parla à Noé, en disant:
Sors de l'arche, toi et ta femme, tes fils et les femmes de tes fils avec toi.
Fais sortir avec toi tous les animaux de toute chair qui sont avec toi, tant les oiseaux que le bétail et tous les reptiles qui rampent sur la terre: qu'ils se répandent sur la terre, qu'ils soient féconds et multiplient sur la terre.
Et Noé sortit, avec ses fils, sa femme, et les femmes de ses fils.
Tous les animaux, tous les reptiles, tous les oiseaux, tout ce qui se meut sur la terre, selon leurs espèces, sortirent de l'arche.
Noé bâtit un autel à l'éternel; il prit de toutes les bêtes pures et de tous les oiseaux purs, et il offrit des holocaustes sur l'autel.
L'éternel sentit une odeur agréable, et l'éternel dit en son coeur: Je ne maudirai plus la terre, à cause de l'homme, parce que les pensées du coeur de l'homme sont mauvaises dès sa jeunesse; et je ne frapperai plus tout ce qui est vivant, comme je l'ai fait.
Tant que la terre subsistera, les semailles et la moisson, le froid et la chaleur, l'été et l'hiver, le jour et la nuit ne cesseront point.
Dieu bénit Noé et ses fils, et leur dit: Soyez féconds, multipliez, et remplissez la terre.
Vous serez un sujet de crainte et d'effroi pour tout animal de la terre, pour tout oiseau du ciel, pour tout ce qui se meut sur la terre, et pour tous les poissons de la mer: ils sont livrés entre vos mains.
Tout ce qui se meut et qui a vie vous servira de nourriture: je vous donne tout cela comme l'herbe verte.
Seulement, vous ne mangerez point de chair avec son âme, avec son sang.
Sachez-le aussi, je redemanderai le sang de vos âmes, je le redemanderai à tout animal; et je redemanderai l'âme de l'homme à l'homme, à l'homme qui est son frère.
Si quelqu'un verse le sang de l'homme, par l'homme son sang sera versé; car Dieu a fait l'homme à son image.
Et vous, soyez féconds et multipliez, répandez-vous sur la terre et multipliez sur elle.
Dieu parla encore à Noé et à ses fils avec lui, en disant:
Voici, j'établis mon alliance avec vous et avec votre postérité après vous;
avec tous les êtres vivants qui sont avec vous, tant les oiseaux que le bétail et tous les animaux de la terre, soit avec tous ceux qui sont sortis de l'arche, soit avec tous les animaux de la terre.
J'établis mon alliance avec vous: aucune chair ne sera plus exterminée par les eaux du déluge, et il n'y aura plus de déluge pour détruire la terre.
Et Dieu dit: C'est ici le signe de l'alliance que j'établis entre moi et vous, et tous les êtres vivants qui sont avec vous, pour les générations à toujours:
j'ai placé mon arc dans la nue, et il servira de signe d'alliance entre moi et la terre.
Quand j'aurai rassemblé des nuages au-dessus de la terre, l'arc paraîtra dans la nue;
et je me souviendrai de mon alliance entre moi et vous, et tous les êtres vivants, de toute chair, et les eaux ne deviendront plus un déluge pour détruire toute chair.
L'arc sera dans la nue; et je le regarderai, pour me souvenir de l'alliance perpétuelle entre Dieu et tous les êtres vivants, de toute chair qui est sur la terre.
Et Dieu dit à Noé: Tel est le signe de l'alliance que j'établis entre moi et toute chair qui est sur la terre.
Les fils de Noé, qui sortirent de l'arche, étaient Sem, Cham et Japhet. Cham fut le père de Canaan.
Ce sont là les trois fils de Noé, et c'est leur postérité qui peupla toute la terre.
Noé commença à cultiver la terre, et planta de la vigne.
Il but du vin, s'enivra, et se découvrit au milieu de sa tente.
Cham, père de Canaan, vit la nudité de son père, et il le rapporta dehors à ses deux frères.
Alors Sem et Japhet prirent le manteau, le mirent sur leurs épaules, marchèrent à reculons, et couvrirent la nudité de leur père; comme leur visage était détourné, ils ne virent point la nudité de leur père.
Lorsque Noé se réveilla de son vin, il apprit ce que lui avait fait son fils cadet.
Et il dit: Maudit soit Canaan! qu'il soit l'esclave des esclaves de ses frères!
Il dit encore: Béni soit l'éternel, Dieu de Sem, et que Canaan soit leur esclave!
Que Dieu étende les possessions de Japhet, qu'il habite dans les tentes de Sem, et que Canaan soit leur esclave!
Noé vécut, après le déluge, trois cent cinquante ans.
Tous les jours de Noé furent de neuf cent cinquante ans; puis il mourut.
Voici la postérité des fils de Noé, Sem, Cham et Japhet. Il leur naquit des fils après le déluge.
Les fils de Japhet furent: Gomer, Magog, Madaï, Javan, Tubal, Méschec et Tiras.
Les fils de Gomer: Aschkenaz, Riphat et Togarma.
Les fils de Javan: élischa, Tarsis, Kittim et Dodanim.
C'est par eux qu'ont été peuplées les îles des nations selon leurs terres, selon la langue de chacun, selon leurs familles, selon leurs nations.
Les fils de Cham furent: Cusch, Mitsraïm, Puth et Canaan.
Les fils de Cusch: Saba, Havila, Sabta, Raema et Sabteca. Les fils de Raema: Séba et Dedan.
Cusch engendra aussi Nimrod; c'est lui qui commença à être puissant sur la terre.
Il fut un vaillant chasseur devant l'éternel; c'est pourquoi l'on dit: Comme Nimrod, vaillant chasseur devant l'éternel.
Il régna d'abord sur Babel, érec, Accad et Calné, au pays de Schinear.
De ce pays-là sortit Assur; il bâtit Ninive, Rehoboth Hir, Calach,
et Résen entre Ninive et Calach; c'est la grande ville.
Mitsraïm engendra les Ludim, les Anamim, les Lehabim, les Naphtuhim,
les Patrusim, les Casluhim, d'où sont sortis les Philistins, et les Caphtorim.
Canaan engendra Sidon, son premier-né, et Heth;
et les Jébusiens, les Amoréens, les Guirgasiens,
les Héviens, les Arkiens, les Siniens,
les Arvadiens, les Tsemariens, les Hamathiens. Ensuite, les familles des Cananéens se dispersèrent.
Les limites des Cananéens allèrent depuis Sidon, du côté de Guérar, jusqu'à Gaza, et du côté de Sodome, de Gomorrhe, d'Adma et de Tseboïm, jusqu'à Léscha.
Ce sont là les fils de Cham, selon leurs familles, selon leurs langues, selon leurs pays, selon leurs nations.
Il naquit aussi des fils à Sem, père de tous les fils d'Héber, et frère de Japhet l'aîné.
Les fils de Sem furent: élam, Assur, Arpacschad, Lud et Aram.
Les fils d'Aram: Uts, Hul, Guéter et Masch.
Arpacschad engendra Schélach; et Schélach engendra Héber.
Il naquit à Héber deux fils: le nom de l'un était Péleg, parce que de son temps la terre fut partagée, et le nom de son frère était Jokthan.
Jokthan engendra Almodad, Schéleph, Hatsarmaveth, Jérach,
Hadoram, Uzal, Dikla,
Obal, Abimaël, Séba,
Ophir, Havila et Jobab. Tous ceux-là furent fils de Jokthan.
Ils habitèrent depuis Méscha, du côté de Sephar, jusqu'à la montagne de l'orient.
Ce sont là les fils de Sem, selon leurs familles, selon leurs langues, selon leurs pays, selon leurs nations.
Telles sont les familles des fils de Noé, selon leurs générations, selon leurs nations. Et c'est d'eux que sont sorties les nations qui se sont répandues sur la terre après le déluge.
Toute la terre avait une seule langue et les mêmes mots.
Comme ils étaient partis de l'orient, ils trouvèrent une plaine au pays de Schinear, et ils y habitèrent.
Ils se dirent l'un à l'autre: Allons! faisons des briques, et cuisons-les au feu. Et la brique leur servit de pierre, et le bitume leur servit de ciment.
Ils dirent encore: Allons! bâtissons-nous une ville et une tour dont le sommet touche au ciel, et faisons-nous un nom, afin que nous ne soyons pas dispersés sur la face de toute la terre.
L'éternel descendit pour voir la ville et la tour que bâtissaient les fils des hommes.
Et l'éternel dit: Voici, ils forment un seul peuple et ont tous une même langue, et c'est là ce qu'ils ont entrepris; maintenant rien ne les empêcherait de faire tout ce qu'ils auraient projeté.
Allons! descendons, et là confondons leur langage, afin qu'ils n'entendent plus la langue, les uns des autres.
Et l'éternel les dispersa loin de là sur la face de toute la terre; et ils cessèrent de bâtir la ville.
C'est pourquoi on l'appela du nom de Babel, car c'est là que l'éternel confondit le langage de toute la terre, et c'est de là que l'éternel les dispersa sur la face de toute la terre.
Voici la postérité de Sem. Sem, âgé de cent ans, engendra Arpacschad, deux ans après le déluge.
Sem vécut, après la naissance d'Arpacschad, cinq cents ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Arpacschad, âgé de trente-cinq ans, engendra Schélach.
Arpacschad vécut, après la naissance de Schélach, quatre cent trois ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Schélach, âgé de trente ans, engendra Héber.
Schélach vécut, après la naissance d'Héber, quatre cent trois ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Héber, âgé de trente-quatre ans, engendra Péleg.
Héber vécut, après la naissance de Péleg, quatre cent trente ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Péleg, âgé de trente ans, engendra Rehu.
Péleg vécut, après la naissance de Rehu, deux cent neuf ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Rehu, âgé de trente-deux ans, engendra Serug.
Rehu vécut, après la naissance de Serug, deux cent sept ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Serug, âgé de trente ans, engendra Nachor.
Serug vécut, après la naissance de Nachor, deux cents ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Nachor, âgé de vingt-neuf ans, engendra Térach.
Nachor vécut, après la naissance de Térach, cent dix-neuf ans; et il engendra des fils et des filles.
Térach, âgé de soixante-dix ans, engendra Abram, Nachor et Haran.
Voici la postérité de Térach. Térach engendra Abram, Nachor et Haran. -Haran engendra Lot.
Et Haran mourut en présence de Térach, son père, au pays de sa naissance, à Ur en Chaldée. -
Abram et Nachor prirent des femmes: le nom de la femme d'Abram était Saraï, et le nom de la femme de Nachor était Milca, fille d'Haran, père de Milca et père de Jisca.
Saraï était stérile: elle n'avait point d'enfants.
Térach prit Abram, son fils, et Lot, fils d'Haran, fils de son fils, et Saraï, sa belle-fille, femme d'Abram, son fils. Ils sortirent ensemble d'Ur en Chaldée, pour aller au pays de Canaan. Ils vinrent jusqu'à Charan, et ils y habitèrent.
Les jours de Térach furent de deux cent cinq ans; et Térach mourut à Charan.
L'éternel dit à Abram: Va-t-en de ton pays, de ta patrie, et de la maison de ton père, dans le pays que je te montrerai.
Je ferai de toi une grande nation, et je te bénirai; je rendrai ton nom grand, et tu seras une source de bénédiction.
Je bénirai ceux qui te béniront, et je maudirai ceux qui te maudiront; et toutes les familles de la terre seront bénies en toi.
Abram partit, comme l'éternel le lui avait dit, et Lot partit avec lui. Abram était âgé de soixante-quinze ans, lorsqu'il sortit de Charan.
Abram prit Saraï, sa femme, et Lot, fils de son frère, avec tous les biens qu'ils possédaient et les serviteurs qu'ils avaient acquis à Charan. Ils partirent pour aller dans le pays de Canaan, et ils arrivèrent au pays de Canaan.
Abram parcourut le pays jusqu'au lieu nommé Sichem, jusqu'aux chênes de Moré. Les Cananéens étaient alors dans le pays.
L'éternel apparut à Abram, et dit: Je donnerai ce pays à ta postérité. Et Abram bâtit là un autel à l'éternel, qui lui était apparu.
Il se transporta de là vers la montagne, à l'orient de Béthel, et il dressa ses tentes, ayant Béthel à l'occident et Aï à l'orient. Il bâtit encore là un autel à l'éternel, et il invoqua le nom de l'éternel.
Abram continua ses marches, en s'avançant vers le midi.
Il y eut une famine dans le pays; et Abram descendit en égypte pour y séjourner, car la famine était grande dans le pays.
Comme il était près d'entrer en égypte, il dit à Saraï, sa femme: Voici, je sais que tu es une femme belle de figure.
Quand les égyptiens te verront, ils diront: C'est sa femme! Et ils me tueront, et te laisseront la vie.
Dis, je te prie, que tu es ma soeur, afin que je sois bien traité à cause de toi, et que mon âme vive grâce à toi.
Lorsque Abram fut arrivé en égypte, les égyptiens virent que la femme était fort belle.
Les grands de Pharaon la virent aussi et la vantèrent à Pharaon; et la femme fut emmenée dans la maison de Pharaon.
Il traita bien Abram à cause d'elle; et Abram reçut des brebis, des boeufs, des ânes, des serviteurs et des servantes, des ânesses, et des chameaux.
Mais l'éternel frappa de grandes plaies Pharaon et sa maison, au sujet de Saraï, femme d'Abram.
Alors Pharaon appela Abram, et dit: Qu'est-ce que tu m'as fait? Pourquoi ne m'as-tu pas déclaré que c'est ta femme?
Pourquoi as-tu dit: C'est ma soeur? Aussi l'ai-je prise pour ma femme. Maintenant, voici ta femme, prends-la, et va-t-en!
Et Pharaon donna ordre à ses gens de le renvoyer, lui et sa femme, avec tout ce qui lui appartenait.
Abram remonta d'égypte vers le midi, lui, sa femme, et tout ce qui lui appartenait, et Lot avec lui.
Abram était très riche en troupeaux, en argent et en or.
Il dirigea ses marches du midi jusqu'à Béthel, jusqu'au lieu où était sa tente au commencement, entre Béthel et Aï,
au lieu où était l'autel qu'il avait fait précédemment. Et là, Abram invoqua le nom de l'éternel.
Lot, qui voyageait avec Abram, avait aussi des brebis, des boeufs et des tentes.
Et la contrée était insuffisante pour qu'ils demeurassent ensemble, car leurs biens étaient si considérables qu'ils ne pouvaient demeurer ensemble.
Il y eut querelle entre les bergers des troupeaux d'Abram et les bergers des troupeaux de Lot. Les Cananéens et les Phérésiens habitaient alors dans le pays.
Abram dit à Lot: Qu'il n'y ait point, je te prie, de dispute entre moi et toi, ni entre mes bergers et tes bergers; car nous sommes frères.
Tout le pays n'est-il pas devant toi? Sépare-toi donc de moi: si tu vas à gauche, j'irai à droite; si tu vas à droite, j'irai à gauche.
Lot leva les yeux, et vit toute la plaine du Jourdain, qui était entièrement arrosée. Avant que l'éternel eût détruit Sodome et Gomorrhe, c'était, jusqu'à Tsoar, comme un jardin de l'éternel, comme le pays d'égypte.
Lot choisit pour lui toute la plaine du Jourdain, et il s'avança vers l'orient. C'est ainsi qu'ils se séparèrent l'un de l'autre.
Abram habita dans le pays de Canaan; et Lot habita dans les villes de la plaine, et dressa ses tentes jusqu'à Sodome.
Les gens de Sodome étaient méchants, et de grands pécheurs contre l'éternel.
L'éternel dit à Abram, après que Lot se fut séparé de lui: Lève les yeux, et, du lieu où tu es, regarde vers le nord et le midi, vers l'orient et l'occident;
car tout le pays que tu vois, je le donnerai à toi et à ta postérité pour toujours.
Je rendrai ta postérité comme la poussière de la terre, en sorte que, si quelqu'un peut compter la poussière de la terre, ta postérité aussi sera comptée.
Lève-toi, parcours le pays dans sa longueur et dans sa largeur; car je te le donnerai.
Abram leva ses tentes, et vint habiter parmi les chênes de Mamré, qui sont près d'Hébron. Et il bâtit là un autel à l'éternel.
Dans le temps d'Amraphel, roi de Schinear, d'Arjoc, roi d'Ellasar, de Kedorlaomer, roi d'élam, et de Tideal, roi de Gojim,
il arriva qu'ils firent la guerre à Béra, roi de Sodome, à Birscha, roi de Gomorrhe, à Schineab, roi d'Adma, à Schémeéber, roi de Tseboïm, et au roi de Béla, qui est Tsoar.
Ces derniers s'assemblèrent tous dans la vallée de Siddim, qui est la mer Salée.
Pendant douze ans, ils avaient été soumis à Kedorlaomer; et la treizième année, ils s'étaient révoltés.
Mais, la quatorzième année, Kedorlaomer et les rois qui étaient avec lui se mirent en marche, et ils battirent les Rephaïm à Aschteroth Karnaïm, les Zuzim à Ham, les émim à Schavé Kirjathaïm,
et les Horiens dans leur montagne de Séir, jusqu'au chêne de Paran, qui est près du désert.
Puis ils s'en retournèrent, vinrent à En Mischpath, qui est Kadès, et battirent les Amalécites sur tout leur territoire, ainsi que les Amoréens établis à Hatsatson Thamar.
Alors s'avancèrent le roi de Sodome, le roi de Gomorrhe, le roi d'Adma, le roi de Tseboïm, et le roi de Béla, qui est Tsoar; et ils se rangèrent en bataille contre eux, dans la vallée de Siddim,
contre Kedorlaomer, roi d'élam, Tideal, roi de Gojim, Amraphel, roi de Schinear, et Arjoc, roi d'Ellasar: quatre rois contre cinq.
La vallée de Siddim était couverte de puits de bitume; le roi de Sodome et celui de Gomorrhe prirent la fuite, et y tombèrent; le reste s'enfuit vers la montagne.
Les vainqueurs enlevèrent toutes les richesses de Sodome et de Gomorrhe, et toutes leurs provisions; et ils s'en allèrent.
Ils enlevèrent aussi, avec ses biens, Lot, fils du frère d'Abram, qui demeurait à Sodome; et ils s'en allèrent.
Un fuyard vint l'annoncer à Abram, l'Hébreu; celui-ci habitait parmi les chênes de Mamré, l'Amoréen, frère d'Eschcol et frère d'Aner, qui avaient fait alliance avec Abram.
Dès qu'Abram eut appris que son frère avait été fait prisonnier, il arma trois cent dix-huit de ses plus braves serviteurs, nés dans sa maison, et il poursuivit les rois jusqu'à Dan.
Il divisa sa troupe, pour les attaquer de nuit, lui et ses serviteurs; il les battit, et les poursuivit jusqu'à Choba, qui est à la gauche de Damas.
Il ramena toutes les richesses; il ramena aussi Lot, son frère, avec ses biens, ainsi que les femmes et le peuple.
Après qu'Abram fut revenu vainqueur de Kedorlaomer et des rois qui étaient avec lui, le roi de Sodome sortit à sa rencontre dans la vallée de Schavé, qui est la vallée du roi.
Melchisédek, roi de Salem, fit apporter du pain et du vin: il était sacrificateur du Dieu Très Haut.
Il bénit Abram, et dit: Béni soit Abram par le Dieu Très Haut, maître du ciel et de la terre!
Béni soit le Dieu Très Haut, qui a livré tes ennemis entre tes mains! Et Abram lui donna la dîme de tout.
Le roi de Sodome dit à Abram: Donne-moi les personnes, et prends pour toi les richesses.
Abram répondit au roi de Sodome: Je lève la main vers l'éternel, le Dieu Très Haut, maître du ciel et de la terre:
je ne prendrai rien de tout ce qui est à toi, pas même un fil, ni un cordon de soulier, afin que tu ne dises pas: J'ai enrichi Abram. Rien pour moi!
Seulement, ce qu'ont mangé les jeunes gens, et la part des hommes qui ont marché avec moi, Aner, Eschcol et Mamré: eux, ils prendront leur part.
Après ces événements, la parole de l'éternel fut adressée à Abram dans une vision, et il dit: Abram, ne crains point; je suis ton bouclier, et ta récompense sera très grande.
Abram répondit: Seigneur éternel, que me donneras-tu? Je m'en vais sans enfants; et l'héritier de ma maison, c'est éliézer de Damas.
Et Abram dit: Voici, tu ne m'as pas donné de postérité, et celui qui est né dans ma maison sera mon héritier.
Alors la parole de l'éternel lui fut adressée ainsi: Ce n'est pas lui qui sera ton héritier, mais c'est celui qui sortira de tes entrailles qui sera ton héritier.
Et après l'avoir conduit dehors, il dit: Regarde vers le ciel, et compte les étoiles, si tu peux les compter. Et il lui dit: Telle sera ta postérité.
Abram eut confiance en l'éternel, qui le lui imputa à justice.
L'éternel lui dit encore: Je suis l'éternel, qui t'ai fait sortir d'Ur en Chaldée, pour te donner en possession ce pays.
Abram répondit: Seigneur éternel, à quoi connaîtrai-je que je le posséderai?
Et l'éternel lui dit: Prends une génisse de trois ans, une chèvre de trois ans, un bélier de trois ans, une tourterelle et une jeune colombe.
Abram prit tous ces animaux, les coupa par le milieu, et mit chaque morceau l'un vis-à-vis de l'autre; mais il ne partagea point les oiseaux.
Les oiseaux de proie s'abattirent sur les cadavres; et Abram les chassa.
Au coucher du soleil, un profond sommeil tomba sur Abram; et voici, une frayeur et une grande obscurité vinrent l'assaillir.
Et l'éternel dit à Abram: Sache que tes descendants seront étrangers dans un pays qui ne sera point à eux; ils y seront asservis, et on les opprimera pendant quatre cents ans.
Mais je jugerai la nation à laquelle ils seront asservis, et ils sortiront ensuite avec de grandes richesses.
Toi, tu iras en paix vers tes pères, tu seras enterré après une heureuse vieillesse.
A la quatrième génération, ils reviendront ici; car l'iniquité des Amoréens n'est pas encore à son comble.
Quand le soleil fut couché, il y eut une obscurité profonde; et voici, ce fut une fournaise fumante, et des flammes passèrent entre les animaux partagés.
En ce jour-là, l'éternel fit alliance avec Abram, et dit: Je donne ce pays à ta postérité, depuis le fleuve d'égypte jusqu'au grand fleuve, au fleuve d'Euphrate,
le pays des Kéniens, des Keniziens, des Kadmoniens,
des Héthiens, des Phéréziens, des Rephaïm,
des Amoréens, des Cananéens, des Guirgasiens et des Jébusiens.
Saraï, femme d'Abram, ne lui avait point donné d'enfants. Elle avait une servante égyptienne, nommée Agar.
Et Saraï dit à Abram: Voici, l'éternel m'a rendue stérile; viens, je te prie, vers ma servante; peut-être aurai-je par elle des enfants. Abram écouta la voix de Saraï.
Alors Saraï, femme d'Abram, prit Agar, l'égyptienne, sa servante, et la donna pour femme à Abram, son mari, après qu'Abram eut habité dix années dans le pays de Canaan.
Il alla vers Agar, et elle devint enceinte. Quand elle se vit enceinte, elle regarda sa maîtresse avec mépris.
Et Saraï dit à Abram: L'outrage qui m'est fait retombe sur toi. J'ai mis ma servante dans ton sein; et, quand elle a vu qu'elle était enceinte, elle m'a regardée avec mépris. Que l'éternel soit juge entre moi et toi!
Abram répondit à Saraï: Voici, ta servante est en ton pouvoir, agis à son égard comme tu le trouveras bon. Alors Saraï la maltraita; et Agar s'enfuit loin d'elle.
L'ange de l'éternel la trouva près d'une source d'eau dans le désert, près de la source qui est sur le chemin de Schur.
Il dit: Agar, servante de Saraï, d'où viens-tu, et où vas-tu? Elle répondit: Je fuis loin de Saraï, ma maîtresse.
L'ange de l'éternel lui dit: Retourne vers ta maîtresse, et humilie-toi sous sa main.
L'ange de l'éternel lui dit: Je multiplierai ta postérité, et elle sera si nombreuse qu'on ne pourra la compter.
L'ange de l'éternel lui dit: Voici, tu es enceinte, et tu enfanteras un fils, à qui tu donneras le nom d'Ismaël; car l'éternel t'a entendue dans ton affliction.
Il sera comme un âne sauvage; sa main sera contre tous, et la main de tous sera contre lui; et il habitera en face de tous ses frères.
Elle appela Atta El roï le nom de l'éternel qui lui avait parlé; car elle dit: Ai-je rien vu ici, après qu'il m'a vue?
C'est pourquoi l'on a appelé ce puits le puits de Lachaï roï; il est entre Kadès et Bared.
Agar enfanta un fils à Abram; et Abram donna le nom d'Ismaël au fils qu'Agar lui enfanta.
Abram était âgé de quatre-vingt-six ans lorsqu'Agar enfanta Ismaël à Abram.
Lorsque Abram fut âgé de quatre-vingt-dix-neuf ans, l'éternel apparut à Abram, et lui dit: Je suis le Dieu tout puissant. Marche devant ma face, et sois intègre.
J'établirai mon alliance entre moi et toi, et je te multiplierai à l'infini.
Abram tomba sur sa face; et Dieu lui parla, en disant:
Voici mon alliance, que je fais avec toi. Tu deviendras père d'une multitude de nations.
On ne t'appellera plus Abram; mais ton nom sera Abraham, car je te rends père d'une multitude de nations.
Je te rendrai fécond à l'infini, je ferai de toi des nations; et des rois sortiront de toi.
J'établirai mon alliance entre moi et toi, et tes descendants après toi, selon leurs générations: ce sera une alliance perpétuelle, en vertu de laquelle je serai ton Dieu et celui de ta postérité après toi.
Je te donnerai, et à tes descendants après toi, le pays que tu habites comme étranger, tout le pays de Canaan, en possession perpétuelle, et je serai leur Dieu.
Dieu dit à Abraham: Toi, tu garderas mon alliance, toi et tes descendants après toi, selon leurs générations.
C'est ici mon alliance, que vous garderez entre moi et vous, et ta postérité après toi: tout mâle parmi vous sera circoncis.
Vous vous circoncirez; et ce sera un signe d'alliance entre moi et vous.
A l'âge de huit jours, tout mâle parmi vous sera circoncis, selon vos générations, qu'il soit né dans la maison, ou qu'il soit acquis à prix d'argent de tout fils d'étranger, sans appartenir à ta race.
On devra circoncire celui qui est né dans la maison et celui qui est acquis à prix d'argent; et mon alliance sera dans votre chair une alliance perpétuelle.
Un mâle incirconcis, qui n'aura pas été circoncis dans sa chair, sera exterminé du milieu de son peuple: il aura violé mon alliance.
Dieu dit à Abraham: Tu ne donneras plus à Saraï, ta femme, le nom de Saraï; mais son nom sera Sara.
Je la bénirai, et je te donnerai d'elle un fils; je la bénirai, et elle deviendra des nations; des rois de peuples sortiront d'elle.
Abraham tomba sur sa face; il rit, et dit en son coeur: Naîtrait-il un fils à un homme de cent ans? et Sara, âgée de quatre-vingt-dix ans, enfanterait-elle?
Et Abraham dit à Dieu: Oh! qu'Ismaël vive devant ta face!
Dieu dit: Certainement Sara, ta femme, t'enfantera un fils; et tu l'appelleras du nom d'Isaac. J'établirai mon alliance avec lui comme une alliance perpétuelle pour sa postérité après lui.
A l'égard d'Ismaël, je t'ai exaucé. Voici, je le bénirai, je le rendrai fécond, et je le multiplierai à l'infini; il engendrera douze princes, et je ferai de lui une grande nation.
J'établirai mon alliance avec Isaac, que Sara t'enfantera à cette époque-ci de l'année prochaine.
Lorsqu'il eut achevé de lui parler, Dieu s'éleva au-dessus d'Abraham.
Abraham prit Ismaël, son fils, tous ceux qui étaient nés dans sa maison et tous ceux qu'il avait acquis à prix d'argent, tous les mâles parmi les gens de la maison d'Abraham; et il les circoncit ce même jour, selon l'ordre que Dieu lui avait donné.
Abraham était âgé de quatre-vingt-dix-neuf ans, lorsqu'il fut circoncis.
Ismaël, son fils, était âgé de treize ans lorsqu'il fut circoncis.
Ce même jour, Abraham fut circoncis, ainsi qu'Ismaël, son fils.
Et tous les gens de sa maison, nés dans sa maison, ou acquis à prix d'argent des étrangers, furent circoncis avec lui.
L'éternel lui apparut parmi les chênes de Mamré, comme il était assis à l'entrée de sa tente, pendant la chaleur du jour.
Il leva les yeux, et regarda: et voici, trois hommes étaient debout près de lui. Quand il les vit, il courut au-devant d'eux, depuis l'entrée de sa tente, et se prosterna en terre.
Et il dit: Seigneur, si j'ai trouvé grâce à tes yeux, ne passe point, je te prie, loin de ton serviteur.
Permettez qu'on apporte un peu d'eau, pour vous laver les pieds; et reposez-vous sous cet arbre.
J'irai prendre un morceau de pain, pour fortifier votre coeur; après quoi, vous continuerez votre route; car c'est pour cela que vous passez près de votre serviteur. Ils répondirent: Fais comme tu l'as dit.
Abraham alla promptement dans sa tente vers Sara, et il dit: Vite, trois mesures de fleur de farine, pétris, et fais des gâteaux.
Et Abraham courut à son troupeau, prit un veau tendre et bon, et le donna à un serviteur, qui se hâta de l'apprêter.
Il prit encore de la crème et du lait, avec le veau qu'on avait apprêté, et il les mit devant eux. Il se tint lui-même à leurs côtés, sous l'arbre. Et ils mangèrent.
Alors ils lui dirent: Où est Sara, ta femme? Il répondit: Elle est là, dans la tente.
L'un d'entre eux dit: Je reviendrai vers toi à cette même époque; et voici, Sara, ta femme, aura un fils. Sara écoutait à l'entrée de la tente, qui était derrière lui.
Abraham et Sara étaient vieux, avancés en âge: et Sara ne pouvait plus espérer avoir des enfants.
Elle rit en elle-même, en disant: Maintenant que je suis vieille, aurais-je encore des désirs? Mon seigneur aussi est vieux.
L'éternel dit à Abraham: Pourquoi donc Sara a-t-elle ri, en disant: Est-ce que vraiment j'aurais un enfant, moi qui suis vieille?
Y a-t-il rien qui soit étonnant de la part de l'éternel? Au temps fixé je reviendrai vers toi, à cette même époque; et Sara aura un fils.
Sara mentit, en disant: Je n'ai pas ri. Car elle eut peur. Mais il dit: Au contraire, tu as ri.
Ces hommes se levèrent pour partir, et ils regardèrent du côté de Sodome. Abraham alla avec eux, pour les accompagner.
Alors l'éternel dit: Cacherai-je à Abraham ce que je vais faire?...
Abraham deviendra certainement une nation grande et puissante, et en lui seront bénies toutes les nations de la terre.
Car je l'ai choisi, afin qu'il ordonne à ses fils et à sa maison après lui de garder la voie de l'éternel, en pratiquant la droiture et la justice, et qu'ainsi l'éternel accomplisse en faveur d'Abraham les promesses qu'il lui a faites...
Et l'éternel dit: Le cri contre Sodome et Gomorrhe s'est accru, et leur péché est énorme.
C'est pourquoi je vais descendre, et je verrai s'ils ont agi entièrement selon le bruit venu jusqu'à moi; et si cela n'est pas, je le saurai.
Les hommes s'éloignèrent, et allèrent vers Sodome. Mais Abraham se tint encore en présence de l'éternel.
Abraham s'approcha, et dit: Feras-tu aussi périr le juste avec le méchant?
Peut-être y a-t-il cinquante justes au milieu de la ville: les feras-tu périr aussi, et ne pardonneras-tu pas à la ville à cause des cinquante justes qui sont au milieu d'elle?
Faire mourir le juste avec le méchant, en sorte qu'il en soit du juste comme du méchant, loin de toi cette manière d'agir! loin de toi! Celui qui juge toute la terre n'exercera-t-il pas la justice?
Et l'éternel dit: Si je trouve dans Sodome cinquante justes au milieu de la ville, je pardonnerai à toute la ville, à cause d'eux.
Abraham reprit, et dit: Voici, j'ai osé parler au Seigneur, moi qui ne suis que poudre et cendre.
Peut-être des cinquante justes en manquera-t-il cinq: pour cinq, détruiras-tu toute la ville? Et l'éternel dit: Je ne la détruirai point, si j'y trouve quarante-cinq justes.
Abraham continua de lui parler, et dit: Peut-être s'y trouvera-t-il quarante justes. Et l'éternel dit: Je ne ferai rien, à cause de ces quarante.
Abraham dit: Que le Seigneur ne s'irrite point, et je parlerai. Peut-être s'y trouvera-t-il trente justes. Et l'éternel dit: Je ne ferai rien, si j'y trouve trente justes.
Abraham dit: Voici, j'ai osé parler au Seigneur. Peut-être s'y trouvera-t-il vingt justes. Et l'éternel dit: Je ne la détruirai point, à cause de ces vingt.
Abraham dit: Que le Seigneur ne s'irrite point, et je ne parlerai plus que cette fois. Peut-être s'y trouvera-t-il dix justes. Et l'éternel dit: Je ne la détruirai point, à cause de ces dix justes.
L'éternel s'en alla lorsqu'il eut achevé de parler à Abraham. Et Abraham retourna dans sa demeure.
Les deux anges arrivèrent à Sodome sur le soir; et Lot était assis à la porte de Sodome. Quand Lot les vit, il se leva pour aller au-devant d'eux, et se prosterna la face contre terre.
Puis il dit: Voici, mes seigneurs, entrez, je vous prie, dans la maison de votre serviteur, et passez-y la nuit; lavez-vous les pieds; vous vous lèverez de bon matin, et vous poursuivrez votre route. Non, répondirent-ils, nous passerons la nuit dans la rue.
Mais Lot les pressa tellement qu'ils vinrent chez lui et entrèrent dans sa maison. Il leur donna un festin, et fit cuire des pains sans levain. Et ils mangèrent.
Ils n'étaient pas encore couchés que les gens de la ville, les gens de Sodome, entourèrent la maison, depuis les enfants jusqu'aux vieillards; toute la population était accourue.
Ils appelèrent Lot, et lui dirent: Où sont les hommes qui sont entrés chez toi cette nuit? Fais-les sortir vers nous, pour que nous les connaissions.
Lot sortit vers eux à l'entrée de la maison, et ferma la porte derrière lui.
Et il dit: Mes frères, je vous prie, ne faites pas le mal!
Voici, j'ai deux filles qui n'ont point connu d'homme; je vous les amènerai dehors, et vous leur ferez ce qu'il vous plaira. Seulement, ne faites rien à ces hommes puisqu'ils sont venus à l'ombre de mon toit.
Ils dirent: Retire-toi! Ils dirent encore: Celui-ci est venu comme étranger, et il veut faire le juge! Eh bien, nous te ferons pis qu'à eux. Et, pressant Lot avec violence, ils s'avancèrent pour briser la porte.
Les hommes étendirent la main, firent rentrer Lot vers eux dans la maison, et fermèrent la porte.
Et ils frappèrent d'aveuglement les gens qui étaient à l'entrée de la maison, depuis le plus petit jusqu'au plus grand, de sorte qu'ils se donnèrent une peine inutile pour trouver la porte.
Les hommes dirent à Lot: Qui as-tu encore ici? Gendres, fils et filles, et tout ce qui t'appartient dans la ville, fais-les sortir de ce lieu.
Car nous allons détruire ce lieu, parce que le cri contre ses habitants est grand devant l'éternel. L'éternel nous a envoyés pour le détruire.
Lot sortit, et parla à ses gendres qui avaient pris ses filles: Levez-vous, dit-il, sortez de ce lieu; car l'éternel va détruire la ville. Mais, aux yeux de ses gendres, il parut plaisanter.
Dès l'aube du jour, les anges insistèrent auprès de Lot, en disant: Lève-toi, prends ta femme et tes deux filles qui se trouvent ici, de peur que tu ne périsses dans la ruine de la ville.
Et comme il tardait, les hommes le saisirent par la main, lui, sa femme et ses deux filles, car l'éternel voulait l'épargner; ils l'emmenèrent, et le laissèrent hors de la ville.
Après les avoir fait sortir, l'un d'eux dit: Sauve-toi, pour ta vie; ne regarde pas derrière toi, et ne t'arrête pas dans toute la plaine; sauve-toi vers la montagne, de peur que tu ne périsses.
Lot leur dit: Oh! non, Seigneur!
Voici, j'ai trouvé grâce à tes yeux, et tu as montré la grandeur de ta miséricorde à mon égard, en me conservant la vie; mais je ne puis me sauver à la montagne, avant que le désastre m'atteigne, et je périrai.
Voici, cette ville est assez proche pour que je m'y réfugie, et elle est petite. Oh! que je puisse m'y sauver,... n'est-elle pas petite?... et que mon âme vive!
Et il lui dit: Voici, je t'accorde encore cette grâce, et je ne détruirai pas la ville dont tu parles.
Hâte-toi de t'y réfugier, car je ne puis rien faire jusqu'à ce que tu y sois arrivé. C'est pour cela que l'on a donné à cette ville le nom de Tsoar.
Le soleil se levait sur la terre, lorsque Lot entra dans Tsoar.
Alors l'éternel fit pleuvoir du ciel sur Sodome et sur Gomorrhe du soufre et du feu, de par l'éternel.
Il détruisit ces villes, toute la plaine et tous les habitants des villes, et les plantes de la terre.
La femme de Lot regarda en arrière, et elle devint une statue de sel.
Abraham se leva de bon matin, pour aller au lieu où il s'était tenu en présence de l'éternel.
Il porta ses regards du côté de Sodome et de Gomorrhe, et sur tout le territoire de la plaine; et voici, il vit s'élever de la terre une fumée, comme la fumée d'une fournaise.
Lorsque Dieu détruisit les villes de la plaine, il se souvint d'Abraham; et il fit échapper Lot du milieu du désastre, par lequel il bouleversa les villes où Lot avait établi sa demeure.
Lot quitta Tsoar pour la hauteur, et se fixa sur la montagne, avec ses deux filles, car il craignait de rester à Tsoar. Il habita dans une caverne, lui et ses deux filles.
L'aînée dit à la plus jeune: Notre père est vieux; et il n'y a point d'homme dans la contrée, pour venir vers nous, selon l'usage de tous les pays.
Viens, faisons boire du vin à notre père, et couchons avec lui, afin que nous conservions la race de notre père.
Elles firent donc boire du vin à leur père cette nuit-là; et l'aînée alla coucher avec son père: il ne s'aperçut ni quand elle se coucha, ni quand elle se leva.
Le lendemain, l'aînée dit à la plus jeune: Voici, j'ai couché la nuit dernière avec mon père; faisons-lui boire du vin encore cette nuit, et va coucher avec lui, afin que nous conservions la race de notre père.
Elles firent boire du vin à leur père encore cette nuit-là; et la cadette alla coucher avec lui: il ne s'aperçut ni quand elle se coucha, ni quand elle se leva.
Les deux filles de Lot devinrent enceintes de leur père.
L'aînée enfanta un fils, qu'elle appela du nom de Moab: c'est le père des Moabites, jusqu'à ce jour.
La plus jeune enfanta aussi un fils, qu'elle appela du nom de Ben Ammi: c'est le père des Ammonites, jusqu'à ce jour.
Abraham partit de là pour la contrée du midi; il s'établit entre Kadès et Schur, et fit un séjour à Guérar.
Abraham disait de Sara, sa femme: C'est ma soeur. Abimélec, roi de Guérar, fit enlever Sara.
Alors Dieu apparut en songe à Abimélec pendant la nuit, et lui dit: Voici, tu vas mourir à cause de la femme que tu as enlevée, car elle a un mari.
Abimélec, qui ne s'était point approché d'elle, répondit: Seigneur, ferais-tu périr même une nation juste?
Ne m'a-t-il pas dit: C'est ma soeur? et elle-même n'a-t-elle pas dit: C'est mon frère? J'ai agi avec un coeur pur et avec des mains innocentes.
Dieu lui dit en songe: Je sais que tu as agi avec un coeur pur; aussi t'ai-je empêché de pécher contre moi. C'est pourquoi je n'ai pas permis que tu la touchasse.
Maintenant, rends la femme de cet homme; car il est prophète, il priera pour toi, et tu vivras. Mais, si tu ne la rends pas, sache que tu mourras, toi et tout ce qui t'appartient.
Abimélec se leva de bon matin, il appela tous ses serviteurs, et leur rapporta toutes ces choses; et ces gens furent saisis d'une grande frayeur.
Abimélec appela aussi Abraham, et lui dit: Qu'est-ce que tu nous as fait? Et en quoi t'ai-je offensé, que tu aies fait venir sur moi et sur mon royaume un si grand péché? Tu as commis à mon égard des actes qui ne doivent pas se commettre.
Et Abimélec dit à Abraham: Quelle intention avais-tu pour agir de la sorte?
Abraham répondit: Je me disais qu'il n'y avait sans doute aucune crainte de Dieu dans ce pays, et que l'on me tuerait à cause de ma femme.
De plus, il est vrai qu'elle est ma soeur, fille de mon père; seulement, elle n'est pas fille de ma mère; et elle est devenue ma femme.
Lorsque Dieu me fit errer loin de la maison de mon père, je dis à Sara: Voici la grâce que tu me feras; dans tous les lieux où nous irons, dis de moi: C'est mon frère.
Abimélec prit des brebis et des boeufs, des serviteurs et des servantes, et les donna à Abraham; et il lui rendit Sara, sa femme.
Abimélec dit: Voici, mon pays est devant toi; demeure où il te plaira.
Et il dit à Sara: Voici, je donne à ton frère mille pièces d'argent; cela te sera un voile sur les yeux pour tous ceux qui sont avec toi, et auprès de tous tu seras justifiée.
Abraham pria Dieu, et Dieu guérit Abimélec, sa femme et ses servantes; et elles purent enfanter.
Car l'éternel avait frappé de stérilité toute la maison d'Abimélec, à cause de Sara, femme d'Abraham.
L'éternel se souvint de ce qu'il avait dit à Sara, et l'éternel accomplit pour Sara ce qu'il avait promis.
Sara devint enceinte, et elle enfanta un fils à Abraham dans sa vieillesse, au temps fixé dont Dieu lui avait parlé.
Abraham donna le nom d'Isaac au fils qui lui était né, que Sara lui avait enfanté.
Abraham circoncit son fils Isaac, âgé de huit jours, comme Dieu le lui avait ordonné.
Abraham était âgé de cent ans, à la naissance d'Isaac, son fils.
Et Sara dit: Dieu m'a fait un sujet de rire; quiconque l'apprendra rira de moi.
Elle ajouta: Qui aurait dit à Abraham: Sara allaitera des enfants? Cependant je lui ai enfanté un fils dans sa vieillesse.
L'enfant grandit, et fut sevré; et Abraham fit un grand festin le jour où Isaac fut sevré.
Sara vit rire le fils qu'Agar, l'égyptienne, avait enfanté à Abraham;
et elle dit à Abraham: Chasse cette servante et son fils, car le fils de cette servante n'héritera pas avec mon fils, avec Isaac.
Cette parole déplut fort aux yeux d'Abraham, à cause de son fils.
Mais Dieu dit à Abraham: Que cela ne déplaise pas à tes yeux, à cause de l'enfant et de ta servante. Accorde à Sara tout ce qu'elle te demandera; car c'est d'Isaac que sortira une postérité qui te sera propre.
Je ferai aussi une nation du fils de ta servante; car il est ta postérité.
Abraham se leva de bon matin; il prit du pain et une outre d'eau, qu'il donna à Agar et plaça sur son épaule; il lui remit aussi l'enfant, et la renvoya. Elle s'en alla, et s'égara dans le désert de Beer Schéba.
Quand l'eau de l'outre fut épuisée, elle laissa l'enfant sous un des arbrisseaux,
et alla s'asseoir vis-à-vis, à une portée d'arc; car elle disait: Que je ne voie pas mourir mon enfant! Elle s'assit donc vis-à-vis de lui, éleva la voix et pleura.
Dieu entendit la voix de l'enfant; et l'ange de Dieu appela du ciel Agar, et lui dit: Qu'as-tu, Agar? Ne crains point, car Dieu a entendu la voix de l'enfant dans le lieu où il est.
Lève-toi, prends l'enfant, saisis-le de ta main; car je ferai de lui une grande nation.
Et Dieu lui ouvrit les yeux, et elle vit un puits d'eau; elle alla remplir d'eau l'outre, et donna à boire à l'enfant.
Dieu fut avec l'enfant, qui grandit, habita dans le désert, et devint tireur d'arc.
Il habita dans le désert de Paran, et sa mère lui prit une femme du pays d'égypte.
En ce temps-là, Abimélec, accompagné de Picol, chef de son armée, parla ainsi à Abraham: Dieu est avec toi dans tout ce que tu fais.
Jure-moi maintenant ici, par le nom de Dieu, que tu ne tromperas ni moi, ni mes enfants, ni mes petits-enfants, et que tu auras pour moi et le pays où tu séjournes la même bienveillance que j'ai eue pour toi.
Abraham dit: Je le jurerai.
Mais Abraham fit des reproches à Abimélec, au sujet d'un puits d'eau, dont s'étaient emparés de force les serviteurs d'Abimélec.
Abimélec répondit: J'ignore qui a fait cette chose-là; tu ne m'en as point informé, et moi, je ne l'apprends qu'aujourd'hui.
Et Abraham prit des brebis et des boeufs, qu'il donna à Abimélec; et ils firent tous deux alliance.
Abraham mit à part sept jeunes brebis.
Et Abimélec dit à Abraham: Qu'est-ce que ces sept jeunes brebis, que tu as mises à part?
Il répondit: Tu accepteras de ma main ces sept brebis, afin que cela me serve de témoignage que j'ai creusé ce puits.
C'est pourquoi on appelle ce lieu Beer Schéba; car c'est là qu'ils jurèrent l'un et l'autre.
Ils firent donc alliance à Beer Schéba. Après quoi, Abimélec se leva, avec Picol, chef de son armée; et ils retournèrent au pays des Philistins.
Abraham planta des tamariscs à Beer Schéba; et là il invoqua le nom de l'éternel, Dieu de l'éternité.
Abraham séjourna longtemps dans le pays des Philistins.
Après ces choses, Dieu mit Abraham à l'épreuve, et lui dit: Abraham! Et il répondit: Me voici!
Dieu dit: Prends ton fils, ton unique, celui que tu aimes, Isaac; va-t'en au pays de Morija, et là offre-le en holocauste sur l'une des montagnes que je te dirai.
Abraham se leva de bon matin, sella son âne, et prit avec lui deux serviteurs et son fils Isaac. Il fendit du bois pour l'holocauste, et partit pour aller au lieu que Dieu lui avait dit.
Le troisième jour, Abraham, levant les yeux, vit le lieu de loin.
Et Abraham dit à ses serviteurs: Restez ici avec l'âne; moi et le jeune homme, nous irons jusque-là pour adorer, et nous reviendrons auprès de vous.
Abraham prit le bois pour l'holocauste, le chargea sur son fils Isaac, et porta dans sa main le feu et le couteau. Et il marchèrent tous deux ensemble.
Alors Isaac, parlant à Abraham, son père, dit: Mon père! Et il répondit: Me voici, mon fils! Isaac reprit: Voici le feu et le bois; mais où est l'agneau pour l'holocauste?
Abraham répondit: Mon fils, Dieu se pourvoira lui-même de l'agneau pour l'holocauste. Et ils marchèrent tous deux ensemble.
Lorsqu'ils furent arrivés au lieu que Dieu lui avait dit, Abraham y éleva un autel, et rangea le bois. Il lia son fils Isaac, et le mit sur l'autel, par-dessus le bois.
Puis Abraham étendit la main, et prit le couteau, pour égorger son fils.
Alors l'ange de l'éternel l'appela des cieux, et dit: Abraham! Abraham! Et il répondit: Me voici!
L'ange dit: N'avance pas ta main sur l'enfant, et ne lui fais rien; car je sais maintenant que tu crains Dieu, et que tu ne m'as pas refusé ton fils, ton unique.
Abraham leva les yeux, et vit derrière lui un bélier retenu dans un buisson par les cornes; et Abraham alla prendre le bélier, et l'offrit en holocauste à la place de son fils.
Abraham donna à ce lieu le nom de Jehova Jiré. C'est pourquoi l'on dit aujourd'hui: A la montagne de l'éternel il sera pourvu.
L'ange de l'éternel appela une seconde fois Abraham des cieux,
et dit: Je le jure par moi-même, parole de l'éternel! parce que tu as fais cela, et que tu n'as pas refusé ton fils, ton unique,
je te bénirai et je multiplierai ta postérité, comme les étoiles du ciel et comme le sable qui est sur le bord de la mer; et ta postérité possédera la porte de ses ennemis.
Toutes les nations de la terre seront bénies en ta postérité, parce que tu as obéi à ma voix.
Abraham étant retourné vers ses serviteurs, ils se levèrent et s'en allèrent ensemble à Beer Schéba; car Abraham demeurait à Beer Schéba.
Après ces choses, on fit à Abraham un rapport, en disant: Voici, Milca a aussi enfanté des fils à Nachor, ton frère:
Uts, son premier-né, Buz, son frère, Kemuel, père d'Aram,
Késed, Hazo, Pildasch, Jidlaph et Bethuel.
Bethuel a engendré Rebecca. Ce sont là les huit fils que Milca a enfantés à Nachor, frère d'Abraham.
Sa concubine, nommée Réuma, a aussi enfanté Thébach, Gaham, Tahasch et Maaca.
La vie de Sara fut de cent vingt-sept ans: telles sont les années de la vie de Sara.
Sara mourut à Kirjath Arba, qui est Hébron, dans le pays de Canaan; et Abraham vint pour mener deuil sur Sara et pour la pleurer.
Abraham se leva de devant son mort, et parla ainsi aux fils de Heth:
Je suis étranger et habitant parmi vous; donnez-moi la possession d'un sépulcre chez vous, pour enterrer mon mort et l'ôter de devant moi.
Les fils de Heth répondirent à Abraham, en lui disant:
écoute-nous, mon seigneur! Tu es un prince de Dieu au milieu de nous; enterre ton mort dans celui de nos sépulcres que tu choisiras; aucun de nous ne te refusera son sépulcre pour enterrer ton mort.
Abraham se leva, et se prosterna devant le peuple du pays, devant les fils de Heth.
Et il leur parla ainsi: Si vous permettez que j'enterre mon mort et que je l'ôte de devant mes yeux, écoutez-moi, et priez pour moi éphron, fils de Tsochar,
de me céder la caverne de Macpéla, qui lui appartient, à l'extrémité de son champ, de me la céder contre sa valeur en argent, afin qu'elle me serve de possession sépulcrale au milieu de vous.
éphron était assis parmi les fils de Heth. Et éphron, le Héthien, répondit à Abraham, en présence des fils de Heth et de tous ceux qui entraient par la porte de sa ville:
Non, mon seigneur, écoute-moi! Je te donne le champ, et je te donne la caverne qui y est. Je te les donne, aux yeux des fils de mon peuple: enterre ton mort.
Abraham se prosterna devant le peuple du pays.
Et il parla ainsi à éphron, en présence du peuple du pays: écoute-moi, je te prie! Je donne le prix du champ: accepte-le de moi; et j'y enterrerai mon mort.
Et éphron répondit à Abraham, en lui disant:
Mon seigneur, écoute-moi! Une terre de quatre cents sicles d'argent, qu'est-ce que cela entre moi et toi? Enterre ton mort.
Abraham comprit éphron; et Abraham pesa à éphron l'argent qu'il avait dit, en présence des fils de Heth, quatre cents sicles d'argent ayant cours chez le marchand.
Le champ d'éphron à Macpéla, vis-à-vis de Mamré, le champ et la caverne qui y est, et tous les arbres qui sont dans le champ et dans toutes ses limites alentour,
devinrent ainsi la propriété d'Abraham, aux yeux des fils de Heth et de tous ceux qui entraient par la porte de sa ville.
Après cela, Abraham enterra Sara, sa femme, dans la caverne du champ de Macpéla, vis-à-vis de Mamré, qui est Hébron, dans le pays de Canaan.
Le champ et la caverne qui y est demeurèrent à Abraham comme possession sépulcrale, acquise des fils de Heth.
Abraham était vieux, avancé en âge; et l'éternel avait béni Abraham en toute chose.
Abraham dit à son serviteur, le plus ancien de sa maison, l'intendant de tous ses biens: Mets, je te prie, ta main sous ma cuisse;
et je te ferai jurer par l'éternel, le Dieu du ciel et le Dieu de la terre, de ne pas prendre pour mon fils une femme parmi les filles des Cananéens au milieu desquels j'habite,
mais d'aller dans mon pays et dans ma patrie prendre une femme pour mon fils Isaac.
Le serviteur lui répondit: Peut-être la femme ne voudra-t-elle pas me suivre dans ce pays-ci; devrai-je mener ton fils dans le pays d'où tu es sorti?
Abraham lui dit: Garde-toi d'y mener mon fils!
L'éternel, le Dieu du ciel, qui m'a fait sortir de la maison de mon père et de ma patrie, qui m'a parlé et qui m'a juré, en disant: Je donnerai ce pays à ta postérité, lui-même enverra son ange devant toi; et c'est de là que tu prendras une femme pour mon fils.
Si la femme ne veut pas te suivre, tu seras dégagé de ce serment que je te fais faire. Seulement, tu n'y mèneras pas mon fils.
Le serviteur mit sa main sous la cuisse d'Abraham, son seigneur, et lui jura d'observer ces choses.
Le serviteur prit dix chameaux parmi les chameaux de son seigneur, et il partit, ayant à sa disposition tous les biens de son seigneur. Il se leva, et alla en Mésopotamie, à la ville de Nachor.
Il fit reposer les chameaux sur leurs genoux hors de la ville, près d'un puits, au temps du soir, au temps où sortent celles qui vont puiser de l'eau.
Et il dit: éternel, Dieu de mon seigneur Abraham, fais-moi, je te prie, rencontrer aujourd'hui ce que je désire, et use de bonté envers mon seigneur Abraham!
Voici, je me tiens près de la source d'eau, et les filles des gens de la ville vont sortir pour puiser l'eau.
Que la jeune fille à laquelle je dirai: Penche ta cruche, je te prie, pour que je boive, et qui répondra: Bois, et je donnerai aussi à boire à tes chameaux, soit celle que tu as destinée à ton serviteur Isaac! Et par là je connaîtrai que tu uses de bonté envers mon seigneur.
Il n'avait pas encore fini de parler que sortit, sa cruche sur l'épaule, Rebecca, née de Bethuel, fils de Milca, femme de Nachor, frère d'Abraham.
C'était une jeune fille très belle de figure; elle était vierge, et aucun homme ne l'avait connue. Elle descendit à la source, remplit sa cruche, et remonta.
Le serviteur courut au-devant d'elle, et dit: Laisse-moi boire, je te prie, un peu d'eau de ta cruche.
Elle répondit: Bois, mon seigneur. Et elle s'empressa d'abaisser sa cruche sur sa main, et de lui donner à boire.
Quand elle eut achevé de lui donner à boire, elle dit: Je puiserai aussi pour tes chameaux, jusqu'à ce qu'ils aient assez bu.
Et elle s'empressa de vider sa cruche dans l'abreuvoir, et courut encore au puits pour puiser; et elle puisa pour tous les chameaux.
L'homme la regardait avec étonnement et sans rien dire, pour voir si l'éternel faisait réussir son voyage, ou non.
Quand les chameaux eurent fini de boire, l'homme prit un anneau d'or, du poids d'un demi-sicle, et deux bracelets, du poids de dix sicles d'or.
Et il dit: De qui es-tu fille? dis-le moi, je te prie. Y a-t-il dans la maison de ton père de la place pour passer la nuit?
Elle répondit: Je suis fille de Bethuel, fils de Milca et de Nachor.
Elle lui dit encore: Il y a chez nous de la paille et du fourrage en abondance, et aussi de la place pour passer la nuit.
Alors l'homme s'inclina et se prosterna devant l'éternel,
en disant: Béni soit l'éternel, le Dieu de mon seigneur Abraham, qui n'a pas renoncé à sa miséricorde et à sa fidélité envers mon seigneur! Moi-même, l'éternel m'a conduit à la maison des frères de mon seigneur.
La jeune fille courut raconter ces choses à la maison de sa mère.
Rebecca avait un frère, nommé Laban. Et Laban courut dehors vers l'homme, près de la source.
Il avait vu l'anneau et les bracelets aux mains de sa soeur, et il avait entendu les paroles de Rebecca, sa soeur, disant: Ainsi m'a parlé l'homme. Il vint donc à cet homme qui se tenait auprès des chameaux, vers la source,
et il dit: Viens, béni de l'éternel! Pourquoi resterais-tu dehors? J'ai préparé la maison, et une place pour les chameaux.
L'homme arriva à la maison. Laban fit décharger les chameaux, et il donna de la paille et du fourrage aux chameaux, et de l'eau pour laver les pieds de l'homme et les pieds des gens qui étaient avec lui.
Puis, il lui servit à manger. Mais il dit: Je ne mangerai point, avant d'avoir dit ce que j'ai à dire. Parle! dit Laban.
Alors il dit: Je suis serviteur d'Abraham.
L'éternel a comblé de bénédictions mon seigneur, qui est devenu puissant. Il lui a donné des brebis et des boeufs, de l'argent et de l'or, des serviteurs et des servantes, des chameaux et des ânes.
Sara, la femme de mon seigneur, a enfanté dans sa vieillesse un fils à mon seigneur; et il lui a donné tout ce qu'il possède.
Mon seigneur m'a fait jurer, en disant: Tu ne prendras pas pour mon fils une femme parmi les filles des Cananéens, dans le pays desquels j'habite;
mais tu iras dans la maison de mon père et de ma famille prendre une femme pour mon fils.
J'ai dit à mon seigneur: Peut-être la femme ne voudra-t-elle pas me suivre.
Et il m'a répondu: L'éternel, devant qui j'ai marché, enverra son ange avec toi, et fera réussir ton voyage; et tu prendras pour mon fils une femme de la famille et de la maison de mon père.
Tu seras dégagé du serment que tu me fais, quand tu auras été vers ma famille; si on ne te l'accorde pas, tu seras dégagé du serment que tu me fais.
Je suis arrivé aujourd'hui à la source, et j'ai dit: éternel, Dieu de mon seigneur Abraham, si tu daignes faire réussir le voyage que j'accomplis,
voici, je me tiens près de la source d'eau, et que la jeune fille qui sortira pour puiser, à qui je dirai: Laisse-moi boire, je te prie, un peu d'eau de ta cruche, et qui me répondra:
Bois toi-même, et je puiserai aussi pour tes chameaux, que cette jeune fille soit la femme que l'éternel a destinée au fils de mon seigneur!
Avant que j'eusse fini de parler en mon coeur, voici, Rebecca est sortie, sa cruche sur l'épaule; elle est descendue à la source, et a puisé. Je lui ai dit: Donne-moi à boire, je te prie.
Elle s'est empressée d'abaisser sa cruche de dessus son épaule, et elle a dit: Bois, et je donnerai aussi à boire à tes chameaux. J'ai bu, et elle a aussi donné à boire à mes chameaux.
Je l'ai interrogée, et j'ai dit: De qui es-tu fille? Elle a répondu: Je suis fille de Bethuel, fils de Nachor et de Milca. J'ai mis l'anneau à son nez, et les bracelets à ses mains.
Puis je me suis incliné et prosterné devant l'éternel, et j'ai béni L'éternel, le Dieu de mon seigneur Abraham, qui m'a conduit fidèlement, afin que je prisse la fille du frère de mon seigneur pour son fils.
Maintenant, si vous voulez user de bienveillance et de fidélité envers mon seigneur, déclarez-le-moi; sinon, déclarez-le-moi, et je me tournerai à droite ou à gauche.
Laban et Bethuel répondirent, et dirent: C'est de l'éternel que la chose vient; nous ne pouvons te parler ni en mal ni en bien.
Voici Rebecca devant toi; prends et va, et qu'elle soit la femme du fils de ton seigneur, comme l'éternel l'a dit.
Lorsque le serviteur d'Abraham eut entendu leurs paroles, il se prosterna en terre devant l'éternel.
Et le serviteur sortit des objets d'argent, des objets d'or, et des vêtements, qu'il donna à Rebecca; il fit aussi de riches présents à son frère et à sa mère.
Après quoi, ils mangèrent et burent, lui et les gens qui étaient avec lui, et ils passèrent la nuit. Le matin, quand ils furent levés, le serviteur dit: Laissez-moi retournez vers mon seigneur.
Le frère et la mère dirent: Que la jeune fille reste avec nous quelque temps encore, une dizaine de jours; ensuite, tu partiras.
Il leur répondit: Ne me retardez pas, puisque l'éternel a fait réussir mon voyage; laissez-moi partir, et que j'aille vers mon seigneur.
Alors ils répondirent: Appelons la jeune fille et consultons-la.
Ils appelèrent donc Rebecca, et lui dirent: Veux-tu aller avec cet homme? Elle répondit: J'irai.
Et ils laissèrent partir Rebecca, leur soeur, et sa nourrice, avec le serviteur d'Abraham et ses gens.
Ils bénirent Rebecca, et lui dirent: O notre soeur, puisse-tu devenir des milliers de myriades, et que ta postérité possède la porte de ses ennemis!
Rebecca se leva, avec ses servantes; elles montèrent sur les chameaux, et suivirent l'homme. Et le serviteur emmena Rebecca, et partit.
Cependant Isaac était revenu du puits de Lachaï roï, et il habitait dans le pays du midi.
Un soir qu'Isaac était sorti pour méditer dans les champs, il leva les yeux, et regarda; et voici, des chameaux arrivaient.
Rebecca leva aussi les yeux, vit Isaac, et descendit de son chameau.
Elle dit au serviteur: Qui est cet homme, qui vient dans les champs à notre rencontre? Et le serviteur répondit: C'est mon seigneur. Alors elle prit son voile, et se couvrit.
Le serviteur raconta à Isaac toutes les choses qu'il avait faites.
Isaac conduisit Rebecca dans la tente de Sara, sa mère; il prit Rebecca, qui devint sa femme, et il l'aima. Ainsi fut consolé Isaac, après avoir perdu sa mère.
Abraham prit encore une femme, nommée Ketura.
Elle lui enfanta Zimran, Jokschan, Medan, Madian, Jischbak et Schuach.
Jokschan engendra Séba et Dedan. Les fils de Dedan furent les Aschurim, les Letuschim et les Leummim.
Les fils de Madian furent épha, épher, Hénoc, Abida et Eldaa. -Ce sont là tous les fils de Ketura.
Abraham donna tous ses biens à Isaac.
Il fit des dons aux fils de ses concubines; et, tandis qu'il vivait encore, il les envoya loin de son fils Isaac du côté de l'orient, dans le pays d'Orient.
Voici les jours des années de la vie d'Abraham: il vécut cent soixante quinze ans.
Abraham expira et mourut, après une heureuse vieillesse, âgé et rassasié de jours, et il fut recueilli auprès de son peuple.
Isaac et Ismaël, ses fils, l'enterrèrent dans la caverne de Macpéla, dans le champ d'éphron, fils de Tsochar, le Héthien, vis-à-vis de Mamré.
C'est le champ qu'Abraham avait acquis des fils de Heth. Là furent enterrés Abraham et Sara, sa femme.
Après la mort d'Abraham, Dieu bénit Isaac, son fils. Il habitait près du puits de Lachaï roï.
Voici la postérité d'Ismaël, fils d'Abraham, qu'Agar, l'égyptienne, servante de Sara, avait enfanté à Abraham.
Voici les noms des fils d'Ismaël, par leurs noms, selon leurs générations: Nebajoth, premier-né d'Ismaël, Kédar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
Mischma, Duma, Massa,
Hadad, Théma, Jethur, Naphisch et Kedma.
Ce sont là les fils d'Ismaël; ce sont là leurs noms, selon leurs parcs et leurs enclos. Ils furent les douze chefs de leurs peuples.
Et voici les années de la vie d'Ismaël: cent trente-sept ans. Il expira et mourut, et il fut recueilli auprès de son peuple.
Ses fils habitèrent depuis Havila jusqu'à Schur, qui est en face de l'égypte, en allant vers l'Assyrie. Il s'établit en présence de tous ses frères.
Voici la postérité d'Isaac, fils d'Abraham.
Abraham engendra Isaac. Isaac était âgé de quarante ans, quand il prit pour femme Rebecca, fille de Bethuel, l'Araméen, de Paddan Aram, et soeur de Laban, l'Araméen.
Isaac implora l'éternel pour sa femme, car elle était stérile, et l'éternel l'exauça: Rebecca, sa femme, devint enceinte.
Les enfants se heurtaient dans son sein; et elle dit: S'il en est ainsi, pourquoi suis-je enceinte? Elle alla consulter l'éternel.
Et l'éternel lui dit: Deux nations sont dans ton ventre, et deux peuples se sépareront au sortir de tes entrailles; un de ces peuples sera plus fort que l'autre, et le plus grand sera assujetti au plus petit.
Les jours où elle devait accoucher s'accomplirent; et voici, il y avait deux jumeaux dans son ventre.
Le premier sortit entièrement roux, comme un manteau de poil; et on lui donna le nom d'ésaü.
Ensuite sortit son frère, dont la main tenait le talon d'ésaü; et on lui donna le nom de Jacob. Isaac était âgé de soixante ans, lorsqu'ils naquirent.
Ces enfants grandirent. ésaü devint un habile chasseur, un homme des champs; mais Jacob fut un homme tranquille, qui restait sous les tentes.
Isaac aimait ésaü, parce qu'il mangeait du gibier; et Rebecca aimait Jacob.
Comme Jacob faisait cuire un potage, ésaü revint des champs, accablé de fatigue.
Et ésaü dit à Jacob: Laisse-moi, je te prie, manger de ce roux, de ce roux-là, car je suis fatigué. C'est pour cela qu'on a donné à ésaü le nom d'édom.
Jacob dit: Vends-moi aujourd'hui ton droit d'aînesse.
ésaü répondit: Voici, je m'en vais mourir; à quoi me sert ce droit d'aînesse?
Et Jacob dit: Jure-le moi d'abord. Il le lui jura, et il vendit son droit d'aînesse à Jacob.
Alors Jacob donna à ésaü du pain et du potage de lentilles. Il mangea et but, puis se leva et s'en alla. C'est ainsi qu'ésaü méprisa le droit d'aînesse.
Il y eut une famine dans le pays, outre la première famine qui eut lieu du temps d'Abraham; et Isaac alla vers Abimélec, roi des Philistins, à Guérar.
L'éternel lui apparut, et dit: Ne descends pas en égypte, demeure dans le pays que je te dirai.
Séjourne dans ce pays-ci: je serai avec toi, et je te bénirai, car je donnerai toutes ces contrées à toi et à ta postérité, et je tiendrai le serment que j'ai fait à Abraham, ton père.
Je multiplierai ta postérité comme les étoiles du ciel; je donnerai à ta postérité toutes ces contrées; et toutes les nations de la terre seront bénies en ta postérité,
parce qu'Abraham a obéi à ma voix, et qu'il a observé mes ordres, mes commandements, mes statuts et mes lois.
Et Isaac resta à Guérar.
Lorsque les gens du lieu faisaient des questions sur sa femme, il disait: C'est ma soeur; car il craignait, en disant ma femme, que les gens du lieu ne le tuassent, parce que Rebecca était belle de figure.
Comme son séjour se prolongeait, il arriva qu'Abimélec, roi des Philistins, regardant par la fenêtre, vit Isaac qui plaisantait avec Rebecca, sa femme.
Abimélec fit appeler Isaac, et dit: Certainement, c'est ta femme. Comment as-tu pu dire: C'est ma soeur? Isaac lui répondit: J'ai parlé ainsi, de peur de mourir à cause d'elle.
Et Abimélec dit: Qu'est-ce que tu nous as fait? Peu s'en est fallu que quelqu'un du peuple n'ait couché avec ta femme, et tu nous aurais rendus coupables.
Alors Abimélec fit cette ordonnance pour tout le peuple: Celui qui touchera à cet homme ou à sa femme sera mis à mort.
Isaac sema dans ce pays, et il recueillit cette année le centuple; car l'éternel le bénit.
Cet homme devint riche, et il alla s'enrichissant de plus en plus, jusqu'à ce qu'il devint fort riche.
Il avait des troupeaux de menu bétail et des troupeaux de gros bétail, et un grand nombre de serviteurs: aussi les Philistins lui portèrent envie.
Tous les puits qu'avaient creusés les serviteurs de son père, du temps d'Abraham, son père, les Philistins les comblèrent et les remplirent de poussière.
Et Abimélec dit à Isaac: Va-t-en de chez nous, car tu es beaucoup plus puissant que nous.
Isaac partit de là, et campa dans la vallée de Guérar, où il s'établit.
Isaac creusa de nouveau les puits d'eau qu'on avait creusés du temps d'Abraham, son père, et qu'avaient comblés les Philistins après la mort d'Abraham; et il leur donna les mêmes noms que son père leur avait donnés.
Les serviteurs d'Isaac creusèrent encore dans la vallée, et y trouvèrent un puits d'eau vive.
Les bergers de Guérar querellèrent les bergers d'Isaac, en disant: L'eau est à nous. Et il donna au puits le nom d'ések, parce qu'ils s'étaient disputés avec lui.
Ses serviteurs creusèrent un autre puits, au sujet duquel on chercha aussi une querelle; et il l'appela Sitna.
Il se transporta de là, et creusa un autre puits, pour lequel on ne chercha pas querelle; et il l'appela Rehoboth, car, dit-il, l'éternel nous a maintenant mis au large, et nous prospérerons dans le pays.
Il remonta de là à Beer Schéba.
L'éternel lui apparut dans la nuit, et dit: Je suis le Dieu d'Abraham, ton père; ne crains point, car je suis avec toi; je te bénirai, et je multiplierai ta postérité, à cause d'Abraham, mon serviteur.
Il bâtit là un autel, invoqua le nom de l'éternel, et y dressa sa tente. Et les serviteurs d'Isaac y creusèrent un puits.
Abimélec vint de Guérar auprès de lui, avec Ahuzath, son ami, et Picol, chef de son armée.
Isaac leur dit: Pourquoi venez-vous vers moi, puisque vous me haïssez et que vous m'avez renvoyé de chez vous?
Ils répondirent: Nous voyons que l'éternel est avec toi. C'est pourquoi nous disons: Qu'il y ait un serment entre nous, entre nous et toi, et que nous fassions alliance avec toi!
Jure que tu ne nous feras aucun mal, de même que nous ne t'avons point maltraité, que nous t'avons fait seulement du bien, et que nous t'avons laissé partir en paix. Tu es maintenant béni de l'éternel.
Isaac leur fit un festin, et ils mangèrent et burent.
Ils se levèrent de bon matin, et se lièrent l'un à l'autre par un serment. Isaac les laissa partir, et ils le quittèrent en paix.
Ce même jour, des serviteurs d'Isaac vinrent lui parler du puits qu'ils creusaient, et lui dirent: Nous avons trouvé de l'eau.
Et il l'appela Schiba. C'est pourquoi on a donné à la ville le nom de Beer Schéba, jusqu'à ce jour.
ésaü, âgé de quarante ans, prit pour femmes Judith, fille de Beéri, le Héthien, et Basmath, fille d'élon, le Héthien.
Elles furent un sujet d'amertume pour le coeur d'Isaac et de Rebecca.
Isaac devenait vieux, et ses yeux s'étaient affaiblis au point qu'il ne voyait plus. Alors il appela ésaü, son fils aîné, et lui dit: Mon fils! Et il lui répondit: Me voici!
Isaac dit: Voici donc, je suis vieux, je ne connais pas le jour de ma mort.
Maintenant donc, je te prie, prends tes armes, ton carquois et ton arc, va dans les champs, et chasse-moi du gibier.
Fais-moi un mets comme j'aime, et apporte-le-moi à manger, afin que mon âme te bénisse avant que je meure.
Rebecca écouta ce qu'Isaac disait à ésaü, son fils. Et ésaü s'en alla dans les champs, pour chasser du gibier et pour le rapporter.
Puis Rebecca dit à Jacob, son fils: Voici, j'ai entendu ton père qui parlait ainsi à ésaü, ton frère:
Apporte-moi du gibier et fais-moi un mets que je mangerai; et je te bénirai devant l'éternel avant ma mort.
Maintenant, mon fils, écoute ma voix à l'égard de ce que je te commande.
Va me prendre au troupeau deux bons chevreaux; j'en ferai pour ton père un mets comme il aime;
et tu le porteras à manger à ton père, afin qu'il te bénisse avant sa mort.
Jacob répondit à sa mère: Voici, ésaü, mon frère, est velu, et je n'ai point de poil.
Peut-être mon père me touchera-t-il, et je passerai à ses yeux pour un menteur, et je ferai venir sur moi la malédiction, et non la bénédiction.
Sa mère lui dit: Que cette malédiction, mon fils, retombe sur moi! écoute seulement ma voix, et va me les prendre.
Jacob alla les prendre, et les apporta à sa mère, qui fit un mets comme son père aimait.
Ensuite, Rebecca prit les vêtements d'ésaü, son fils aîné, les plus beaux qui se trouvaient à la maison, et elle les fit mettre à Jacob, son fils cadet.
Elle couvrit ses mains de la peau des chevreaux, et son cou qui était sans poil.
Et elle plaça dans la main de Jacob, son fils, le mets et le pain qu'elle avait préparés.
Il vint vers son père, et dit: Mon père! Et Isaac dit: Me voici! qui es-tu, mon fils?
Jacob répondit à son père: Je suis ésaü, ton fils aîné; j'ai fait ce que tu m'as dit. Lève-toi, je te prie, assieds-toi, et mange de mon gibier, afin que ton âme me bénisse.
Isaac dit à son fils: Eh quoi! tu en as déjà trouvé, mon fils! Et Jacob répondit: C'est que l'éternel, ton Dieu, l'a fait venir devant moi.
Isaac dit à Jacob: Approche donc, et que je te touche, mon fils, pour savoir si tu es mon fils ésaü, ou non.
Jacob s'approcha d'Isaac, son père, qui le toucha, et dit: La voix est la voix de Jacob, mais les mains sont les mains d'ésaü.
Il ne le reconnut pas, parce que ses mains étaient velues, comme les mains d'ésaü, son frère; et il le bénit.
Il dit: C'est toi qui es mon fils ésaü? Et Jacob répondit: C'est moi.
Isaac dit: Sers-moi, et que je mange du gibier de mon fils, afin que mon âme te bénisse. Jacob le servit, et il mangea; il lui apporta aussi du vin, et il but.
Alors Isaac, son père, lui dit: Approche donc, et baise-moi, mon fils.
Jacob s'approcha, et le baisa. Isaac sentit l'odeur de ses vêtements; puis il le bénit, et dit: Voici, l'odeur de mon fils est comme l'odeur d'un champ que l'éternel a béni.
Que Dieu te donne de la rosée du ciel Et de la graisse de la terre, Du blé et du vin en abondance!
Que des peuples te soient soumis, Et que des nations se prosternent devant toi! Sois le maître de tes frères, Et que les fils de ta mère se prosternent devant toi! Maudit soit quiconque te maudira, Et béni soit quiconque te bénira.
Isaac avait fini de bénir Jacob, et Jacob avait à peine quitté son père Isaac, qu'ésaü, son frère, revint de la chasse.
Il fit aussi un mets, qu'il porta à son père; et il dit à son père: Que mon père se lève et mange du gibier de son fils, afin que ton âme me bénisse!
Isaac, son père, lui dit: Qui es-tu? Et il répondit: Je suis ton fils aîné, ésaü.
Isaac fut saisi d'une grande, d'une violente émotion, et il dit: Qui est donc celui qui a chassé du gibier, et me l'a apporté? J'ai mangé de tout avant que tu vinsses, et je l'ai béni. Aussi sera-t-il béni.
Lorsque ésaü entendit les paroles de son père, il poussa de forts cris, pleins d'amertume, et il dit à son père: Bénis-moi aussi, mon père!
Isaac dit: Ton frère est venu avec ruse, et il a enlevé ta bénédiction.
ésaü dit: Est-ce parce qu'on l'a appelé du nom de Jacob qu'il m'a supplanté deux fois? Il a enlevé mon droit d'aînesse, et voici maintenant qu'il vient d'enlever ma bénédiction. Et il dit: N'as-tu point réservé de bénédiction pour moi?
Isaac répondit, et dit à ésaü: Voici, je l'ai établi ton maître, et je lui ai donné tous ses frères pour serviteurs, je l'ai pourvu de blé et de vin: que puis-je donc faire pour toi, mon fils?
ésaü dit à son père: N'as-tu que cette seule bénédiction, mon père? Bénis-moi aussi, mon père! Et ésaü éleva la voix, et pleura.
Isaac, son père, répondit, et lui dit: Voici! Ta demeure sera privée de la graisse de la terre Et de la rosée du ciel, d'en haut.
Tu vivras de ton épée, Et tu seras asservi à ton frère; Mais en errant librement çà et là, Tu briseras son joug de dessus ton cou.
ésaü conçut de la haine contre Jacob, à cause de la bénédiction dont son père l'avait béni; et ésaü disait en son coeur: Les jours du deuil de mon père vont approcher, et je tuerai Jacob, mon frère.
On rapporta à Rebecca les paroles d'ésaü, son fils aîné. Elle fit alors appeler Jacob, son fils cadet, et elle lui dit: Voici, ésaü, ton frère, veut tirer vengeance de toi, en te tuant.
Maintenant, mon fils, écoute ma voix! Lève-toi, fuis chez Laban, mon frère, à Charan;
et reste auprès de lui quelque temps,
jusqu'à ce que la fureur de ton frère s'apaise, jusqu'à ce que la colère de ton frère se détourne de toi, et qu'il oublie ce que tu lui as fait. Alors je te ferai revenir. Pourquoi serais-je privée de vous deux en un même jour?
Rebecca dit à Isaac: Je suis dégoûtée de la vie, à cause des filles de Heth. Si Jacob prend une femme, comme celles-ci, parmi les filles de Heth, parmi les filles du pays, à quoi me sert la vie?
Isaac appela Jacob, le bénit, et lui donna cet ordre: Tu ne prendras pas une femme parmi les filles de Canaan.
Lève-toi, va à Paddan Aram, à la maison de Bethuel, père de ta mère, et prends-y une femme d'entre les filles de Laban, frère de ta mère.
Que le Dieu tout puissant te bénisse, te rende fécond et te multiplie, afin que tu deviennes une multitude de peuples!
Qu'il te donne la bénédiction d'Abraham, à toi et à ta postérité avec toi, afin que tu possèdes le pays où tu habites comme étranger, et qu'il a donné à Abraham!
Et Isaac fit partir Jacob, qui s'en alla à Paddan Aram, auprès de Laban, fils de Bethuel, l'Araméen, frère de Rebecca, mère de Jacob et d'ésaü.
ésaü vit qu'Isaac avait béni Jacob, et qu'il l'avait envoyé à Paddan Aram pour y prendre une femme, et qu'en le bénissant il lui avait donné cet ordre: Tu ne prendras pas une femme parmi les filles de Canaan.
Il vit que Jacob avait obéi à son père et à sa mère, et qu'il était parti pour Paddan Aram.
ésaü comprit ainsi que les filles de Canaan déplaisaient à Isaac, son père.
Et ésaü s'en alla vers Ismaël. Il prit pour femme, outre les femmes qu'il avait, Mahalath, fille d'Ismaël, fils d'Abraham, et soeur de Nebajoth.
Jacob partit de Beer Schéba, et s'en alla à Charan.
Il arriva dans un lieu où il passa la nuit; car le soleil était couché. Il y prit une pierre, dont il fit son chevet, et il se coucha dans ce lieu-là.
Il eut un songe. Et voici, une échelle était appuyée sur la terre, et son sommet touchait au ciel. Et voici, les anges de Dieu montaient et descendaient par cette échelle.
Et voici, l'éternel se tenait au-dessus d'elle; et il dit: Je suis l'éternel, le Dieu d'Abraham, ton père, et le Dieu d'Isaac. La terre sur laquelle tu es couché, je la donnerai à toi et à ta postérité.
Ta postérité sera comme la poussière de la terre; tu t'étendras à l'occident et à l'orient, au septentrion et au midi; et toutes les familles de la terre seront bénies en toi et en ta postérité.
Voici, je suis avec toi, je te garderai partout où tu iras, et je te ramènerai dans ce pays; car je ne t'abandonnerai point, que je n'aie exécuté ce que je te dis.
Jacob s'éveilla de son sommeil et il dit: Certainement, l'éternel est en ce lieu, et moi, je ne le savais pas!
Il eut peur, et dit: Que ce lieu est redoutable! C'est ici la maison de Dieu, c'est ici la porte des cieux!
Et Jacob se leva de bon matin; il prit la pierre dont il avait fait son chevet, il la dressa pour monument, et il versa de l'huile sur son sommet.
Il donna à ce lieu le nom de Béthel; mais la ville s'appelait auparavant Luz.
Jacob fit un voeu, en disant: Si Dieu est avec moi et me garde pendant ce voyage que je fais, s'il me donne du pain à manger et des habits pour me vêtir,
et si je retourne en paix à la maison de mon père, alors l'éternel sera mon Dieu;
cette pierre, que j'ai dressée pour monument, sera la maison de Dieu; et je te donnerai la dîme de tout ce que tu me donneras.
Jacob se mit en marche, et s'en alla au pays des fils de l'Orient.
Il regarda. Et voici, il y avait un puits dans les champs; et voici, il y avait à côté trois troupeaux de brebis qui se reposaient, car c'était à ce puits qu'on abreuvait les troupeaux. Et la pierre sur l'ouverture du puits était grande.
Tous les troupeaux se rassemblaient là; on roulait la pierre de dessus l'ouverture du puits, on abreuvait les troupeaux, et l'on remettait la pierre à sa place sur l'ouverture du puits.
Jacob dit aux bergers: Mes frères, d'où êtes-vous? Ils répondirent: Nous sommes de Charan.
Il leur dit: Connaissez-vous Laban, fils de Nachor? Ils répondirent: Nous le connaissons.
Il leur dit: Est-il en bonne santé? Ils répondirent: Il est en bonne santé; et voici Rachel, sa fille, qui vient avec le troupeau.
Il dit: Voici, il est encore grand jour, et il n'est pas temps de rassembler les troupeaux; abreuvez les brebis, puis allez, et faites-les paître.
Ils répondirent: Nous ne le pouvons pas, jusqu'à ce que tous les troupeaux soient rassemblés; c'est alors qu'on roule la pierre de dessus l'ouverture du puits, et qu'on abreuve les brebis.
Comme il leur parlait encore, survint Rachel avec le troupeau de son père; car elle était bergère.
Lorsque Jacob vit Rachel, fille de Laban, frère de sa mère, et le troupeau de Laban, frère de sa mère, il s'approcha, roula la pierre de dessus l'ouverture du puits, et abreuva le troupeau de Laban, frère de sa mère.
Et Jacob baisa Rachel, il éleva la voix et pleura.
Jacob apprit à Rachel qu'il était parent de son père, qu'il était fils de Rebecca. Et elle courut l'annoncer à son père.
Dès que Laban eut entendu parler de Jacob, fils de sa soeur, il courut au-devant de lui, il l'embrassa et le baisa, et il le fit venir dans sa maison. Jacob raconta à Laban toutes ces choses.
Et Laban lui dit: Certainement, tu es mon os et ma chair. Jacob demeura un mois chez Laban.
Puis Laban dit à Jacob: Parce que tu es mon parent, me serviras-tu pour rien? Dis-moi quel sera ton salaire.
Or, Laban avait deux filles: l'aînée s'appelait Léa, et la cadette Rachel.
Léa avait les yeux délicats; mais Rachel était belle de taille et belle de figure.
Jacob aimait Rachel, et il dit: Je te servirai sept ans pour Rachel, ta fille cadette.
Et Laban dit: J'aime mieux te la donner que de la donner à un autre homme. Reste chez moi!
Ainsi Jacob servit sept années pour Rachel: et elles furent à ses yeux comme quelques jours, parce qu'il l'aimait.
Ensuite Jacob dit à Laban: Donne-moi ma femme, car mon temps est accompli: et j'irai vers elle.
Laban réunit tous les gens du lieu, et fit un festin.
Le soir, il prit Léa, sa fille, et l'amena vers Jacob, qui s'approcha d'elle.
Et Laban donna pour servante à Léa, sa fille, Zilpa, sa servante.
Le lendemain matin, voilà que c'était Léa. Alors Jacob dit à Laban: Qu'est-ce que tu m'as fait? N'est-ce pas pour Rachel que j'ai servi chez toi? Pourquoi m'as-tu trompé?
Laban dit: Ce n'est point la coutume dans ce lieu de donner la cadette avant l'aînée.
Achève la semaine avec celle-ci, et nous te donnerons aussi l'autre pour le service que tu feras encore chez moi pendant sept nouvelles années.
Jacob fit ainsi, et il acheva la semaine avec Léa; puis Laban lui donna pour femme Rachel, sa fille.
Et Laban donna pour servante à Rachel, sa fille, Bilha, sa servante.
Jacob alla aussi vers Rachel, qu'il aimait plus que Léa; et il servit encore chez Laban pendant sept nouvelles années.
L'éternel vit que Léa n'était pas aimée; et il la rendit féconde, tandis que Rachel était stérile.
Léa devint enceinte, et enfanta un fils, à qui elle donna le nom de Ruben; car elle dit: L'éternel a vu mon humiliation, et maintenant mon mari m'aimera.
Elle devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un fils, et elle dit: L'éternel a entendu que je n'étais pas aimée, et il m'a aussi accordé celui-ci. Et elle lui donna le nom de Siméon.
Elle devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un fils, et elle dit: Pour cette fois, mon mari s'attachera à moi; car je lui ai enfanté trois fils. C'est pourquoi on lui donna le nom de Lévi.
Elle devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un fils, et elle dit: Cette fois, je louerai l'éternel. C'est pourquoi elle lui donna le nom de Juda. Et elle cessa d'enfanter.
Lorsque Rachel vit qu'elle ne donnait point d'enfants à Jacob, elle porta envie à sa soeur, et elle dit à Jacob: Donne-moi des enfants, ou je meurs!
La colère de Jacob s'enflamma contre Rachel, et il dit: Suis-je à la place de Dieu, qui t'empêche d'être féconde?
Elle dit: Voici ma servante Bilha; va vers elle; qu'elle enfante sur mes genoux, et que par elle j'aie aussi des fils.
Et elle lui donna pour femme Bilha, sa servante; et Jacob alla vers elle.
Bilha devint enceinte, et enfanta un fils à Jacob.
Rachel dit: Dieu m'a rendu justice, il a entendu ma voix, et il m'a donné un fils. C'est pourquoi elle l'appela du nom de Dan.
Bilha, servante de Rachel, devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un second fils à Jacob.
Rachel dit: J'ai lutté divinement contre ma soeur, et j'ai vaincu. Et elle l'appela du nom de Nephthali.
Léa voyant qu'elle avait cessé d'enfanter, prit Zilpa, sa servante, et la donna pour femme à Jacob.
Zilpa, servante de Léa, enfanta un fils à Jacob.
Léa dit: Quel bonheur! Et elle l'appela du nom de Gad.
Zilpa, servante de Léa, enfanta un second fils à Jacob.
Léa dit: Que je suis heureuse! car les filles me diront heureuse. Et elle l'appela du nom d'Aser.
Ruben sortit au temps de la moisson des blés, et trouva des mandragores dans les champs. Il les apporta à Léa, sa mère. Alors Rachel dit à Léa: Donne moi, je te prie, des mandragores de ton fils.
Elle lui répondit: Est-ce peu que tu aies pris mon mari, pour que tu prennes aussi les mandragores de mon fils? Et Rachel dit: Eh bien! il couchera avec toi cette nuit pour les mandragores de ton fils.
Le soir, comme Jacob revenait des champs, Léa sortit à sa rencontre, et dit: C'est vers moi que tu viendras, car je t'ai acheté pour les mandragores de mon fils. Et il coucha avec elle cette nuit.
Dieu exauça Léa, qui devint enceinte, et enfanta un cinquième fils à Jacob.
Léa dit: Dieu m'a donné mon salaire parce que j'ai donné ma servante à mon mari. Et elle l'appela du nom d'Issacar.
Léa devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un sixième fils à Jacob.
Léa dit: Dieu m'a fait un beau don; cette fois, mon mari habitera avec moi, car je lui ai enfanté six fils. Et elle l'appela du nom de Zabulon.
Ensuite, elle enfanta une fille, qu'elle appela du nom de Dina.
Dieu se souvint de Rachel, il l'exauça, et il la rendit féconde.
Elle devint enceinte, et enfanta un fils, et elle dit: Dieu a enlevé mon opprobre.
Et elle lui donna le nom de Joseph, en disant: Que l'éternel m'ajoute un autre fils!
Lorsque Rachel eut enfanté Joseph, Jacob dit à Laban: Laisse-moi partir, pour que je m'en aille chez moi, dans mon pays.
Donne-moi mes femmes et mes enfants, pour lesquels je t'ai servi, et je m'en irai; car tu sais quel service j'ai fait pour toi.
Laban lui dit: Puissé-je trouver grâce à tes yeux! Je vois bien que l'éternel m'a béni à cause de toi;
fixe-moi ton salaire, et je te le donnerai.
Jacob lui dit: Tu sais comment je t'ai servi, et ce qu'est devenu ton troupeau avec moi;
car le peu que tu avais avant moi s'est beaucoup accru, et l'éternel t'a béni sur mes pas. Maintenant, quand travaillerai-je aussi pour ma maison?
Laban dit: Que te donnerai-je? Et Jacob répondit: Tu ne me donneras rien. Si tu consens à ce que je vais te dire, je ferai paître encore ton troupeau, et je le garderai.
Je parcourrai aujourd'hui tout ton troupeau; mets à part parmi les brebis tout agneau tacheté et marqueté et tout agneau noir, et parmi les chèvres tout ce qui est marqueté et tacheté. Ce sera mon salaire.
Ma droiture répondra pour moi demain, quand tu viendras voir mon salaire; tout ce qui ne sera pas tacheté et marqueté parmi les chèvres, et noir parmi les agneaux, ce sera de ma part un vol.
Laban dit: Eh bien! qu'il en soit selon ta parole.
Ce même jour, il mit à part les boucs rayés et marquetés, toutes les chèvres tachetées et marquetées, toutes celles où il y avait du blanc, et tout ce qui était noir parmi les brebis. Il les remit entre les mains de ses fils.
Puis il mit l'espace de trois journées de chemin entre lui et Jacob; et Jacob fit paître le reste du troupeau de Laban.
Jacob prit des branches vertes de peuplier, d'amandier et de platane; il y pela des bandes blanches, mettant à nu le blanc qui était sur les branches.
Puis il plaça les branches, qu'il avait pelées, dans les auges, dans les abreuvoirs, sous les yeux des brebis qui venaient boire, pour qu'elles entrassent en chaleur en venant boire.
Les brebis entraient en chaleur près des branches, et elles faisaient des petits rayés, tachetés et marquetés.
Jacob séparait les agneaux, et il mettait ensemble ce qui était rayé et tout ce qui était noir dans le troupeau de Laban. Il se fit ainsi des troupeaux à part, qu'il ne réunit point au troupeau de Laban.
Toutes les fois que les brebis vigoureuses entraient en chaleur, Jacob plaçait les branches dans les auges, sous les yeux des brebis, pour qu'elles entrassent en chaleur près des branches.
Quand les brebis étaient chétives, il ne les plaçait point; de sorte que les chétives étaient pour Laban, et les vigoureuses pour Jacob.
Cet homme devint de plus en plus riche; il eut du menu bétail en abondance, des servantes et des serviteurs, des chameaux et des ânes.
Jacob entendit les propos des fils de Laban, qui disaient: Jacob a pris tout ce qui était à notre père, et c'est avec le bien de notre père qu'il s'est acquis toute cette richesse.
Jacob remarqua aussi le visage de Laban; et voici, il n'était plus envers lui comme auparavant.
Alors l'éternel dit à Jacob: Retourne au pays de tes pères et dans ton lieu de naissance, et je serai avec toi.
Jacob fit appeler Rachel et Léa, qui étaient aux champs vers son troupeau.
Il leur dit: Je vois, au visage de votre père, qu'il n'est plus envers moi comme auparavant; mais le Dieu de mon père a été avec moi.
Vous savez vous-mêmes que j'ai servi votre père de tout mon pouvoir.
Et votre père s'est joué de moi, et a changé dix fois mon salaire; mais Dieu ne lui a pas permis de me faire du mal.
Quand il disait: Les tachetés seront ton salaire, toutes les brebis faisaient des petits tachetés. Et quand il disait: Les rayés seront ton salaire, toutes les brebis faisaient des petits rayés.
Dieu a pris à votre père son troupeau, et me l'a donné.
Au temps où les brebis entraient en chaleur, je levai les yeux, et je vis en songe que les boucs qui couvraient les brebis étaient rayés, tachetés et marquetés.
Et l'ange de Dieu me dit en songe: Jacob! Je répondis: Me voici!
Il dit: Lève les yeux, et regarde: tous les boucs qui couvrent les brebis sont rayés, tachetés et marquetés; car j'ai vu tout ce que te fait Laban.
Je suis le Dieu de Béthel, où tu as oint un monument, où tu m'as fait un voeu. Maintenant, lève-toi, sors de ce pays, et retourne au pays de ta naissance.
Rachel et Léa répondirent, et lui dirent: Avons-nous encore une part et un héritage dans la maison de notre père?
Ne sommes-nous pas regardées par lui comme des étrangères, puisqu'il nous a vendues, et qu'il a mangé notre argent?
Toute la richesse que Dieu a ôtée à notre père appartient à nous et à nos enfants. Fais maintenant tout ce que Dieu t'a dit.
Jacob se leva, et il fit monter ses enfants et ses femmes sur les chameaux.
Il emmena tout son troupeau et tous les biens qu'il possédait, le troupeau qui lui appartenait, qu'il avait acquis à Paddan Aram; et il s'en alla vers Isaac, son père, au pays de Canaan.
Tandis que Laban était allé tondre ses brebis, Rachel déroba les théraphim de son père;
et Jacob trompa Laban, l'Araméen, en ne l'avertissant pas de sa fuite.
Il s'enfuit, avec tout ce qui lui appartenait; il se leva, traversa le fleuve, et se dirigea vers la montagne de Galaad.
Le troisième jour, on annonça à Laban que Jacob s'était enfui.
Il prit avec lui ses frères, le poursuivit sept journées de marche, et l'atteignit à la montagne de Galaad.
Mais Dieu apparut la nuit en songe à Laban, l'Araméen, et lui dit: Garde-toi de parler à Jacob ni en bien ni en mal!
Laban atteignit donc Jacob. Jacob avait dressé sa tente sur la montagne; Laban dressa aussi la sienne, avec ses frères, sur la montagne de Galaad.
Alors Laban dit à Jacob: Qu'as-tu fait? Pourquoi m'as-tu trompé, et emmènes-tu mes filles comme des captives par l'épée?
Pourquoi as-tu pris la fuite en cachette, m'as-tu trompé, et ne m'as-tu point averti? Je t'aurais laissé partir au milieu des réjouissances et des chants, au son du tambourin et de la harpe.
Tu ne m'as pas permis d'embrasser mes fils et mes filles! C'est en insensé que tu as agi.
Ma main est assez forte pour vous faire du mal; mais le Dieu de votre père m'a dit hier: Garde-toi de parler à Jacob ni en bien ni en mal!
Maintenant que tu es parti, parce que tu languissais après la maison de ton père, pourquoi as-tu dérobé mes dieux?
Jacob répondit, et dit à Laban: J'avais de la crainte à la pensée que tu m'enlèverais peut-être tes filles.
Mais périsse celui auprès duquel tu trouveras tes dieux! En présence de nos frères, examine ce qui t'appartient chez moi, et prends-le. Jacob ne savait pas que Rachel les eût dérobés.
Laban entra dans la tente de Jacob, dans la tente de Léa, dans la tente des deux servantes, et il ne trouva rien. Il sortit de la tente de Léa, et entra dans la tente de Rachel.
Rachel avait pris les théraphim, les avait mis sous le bât du chameau, et s'était assise dessus. Laban fouilla toute la tente, et ne trouva rien.
Elle dit à son père: Que mon seigneur ne se fâche point, si je ne puis me lever devant toi, car j'ai ce qui est ordinaire aux femmes. Il chercha, et ne trouva point les théraphim.
Jacob s'irrita, et querella Laban. Il reprit la parole, et lui dit: Quel est mon crime, quel est mon péché, que tu me poursuives avec tant d'ardeur?
Quand tu as fouillé tous mes effets, qu'as-tu trouvé des effets de ta maison? Produis-le ici devant mes frères et tes frères, et qu'ils prononcent entre nous deux.
Voilà vingt ans que j'ai passés chez toi; tes brebis et tes chèvres n'ont point avorté, et je n'ai point mangé les béliers de ton troupeau.
Je ne t'ai point rapporté de bêtes déchirées, j'en ai payé le dommage; tu me redemandais ce qu'on me volait de jour et ce qu'on me volait de nuit.
La chaleur me dévorait pendant le jour, et le froid pendant la nuit, et le sommeil fuyait de mes yeux.
Voilà vingt ans que j'ai passés dans ta maison; je t'ai servi quatorze ans pour tes deux filles, et six ans pour ton troupeau, et tu as changé dix fois mon salaire.
Si je n'eusse pas eu pour moi le Dieu de mon père, le Dieu d'Abraham, celui que craint Isaac, tu m'aurais maintenant renvoyé à vide. Dieu a vu ma souffrance et le travail de mes mains, et hier il a prononcé son jugement.
Laban répondit, et dit à Jacob: Ces filles sont mes filles, ces enfants sont mes enfants, ce troupeau est mon troupeau, et tout ce que tu vois est à moi. Et que puis-je faire aujourd'hui pour mes filles, ou pour leurs enfants qu'elles ont mis au monde?
Viens, faisons alliance, moi et toi, et que cela serve de témoignage entre moi et toi!
Jacob prit une pierre, et il la dressa pour monument.
Jacob dit à ses frères: Ramassez des pierres. Ils prirent des pierres, et firent un monceau; et ils mangèrent là sur le monceau.
Laban l'appela Jegar Sahadutha, et Jacob l'appela Galed.
Laban dit: Que ce monceau serve aujourd'hui de témoignage entre moi et toi! C'est pourquoi on lui a donné le nom de Galed.
On l'appelle aussi Mitspa, parce que Laban dit: Que l'éternel veille sur toi et sur moi, quand nous nous serons l'un et l'autre perdus de vue.
Si tu maltraites mes filles, et si tu prends encore d'autres femmes, ce n'est pas un homme qui sera avec nous, prends-y garde, c'est Dieu qui sera témoin entre moi et toi.
Laban dit à Jacob: Voici ce monceau, et voici ce monument que j'ai élevé entre moi et toi.
Que ce monceau soit témoin et que ce monument soit témoin que je n'irai point vers toi au delà de ce monceau, et que tu ne viendras point vers moi au delà de ce monceau et de ce monument, pour agir méchamment.
Que le Dieu d'Abraham et de Nachor, que le Dieu de leur père soit juge entre nous. Jacob jura par celui que craignait Isaac.
Jacob offrit un sacrifice sur la montagne, et il invita ses frères à manger; ils mangèrent donc, et passèrent la nuit sur la montagne.
Laban se leva de bon matin, baisa ses fils et ses filles, et les bénit. Ensuite il partit pour retourner dans sa demeure.
Jacob poursuivit son chemin; et des anges de Dieu le rencontrèrent.
En les voyant, Jacob dit: C'est le camp de Dieu! Et il donna à ce lieu le nom de Mahanaïm.
Jacob envoya devant lui des messagers à ésaü, son frère, au pays de Séir, dans le territoire d'édom.
Il leur donna cet ordre: Voici ce que vous direz à mon seigneur ésaü: Ainsi parle ton serviteur Jacob: J'ai séjourné chez Laban, et j'y suis resté jusqu'à présent;
j'ai des boeufs, des ânes, des brebis, des serviteurs et des servantes, et j'envoie l'annoncer à mon seigneur, pour trouver grâce à tes yeux.
Les messagers revinrent auprès de Jacob, en disant: Nous sommes allés vers ton frère ésaü; et il marche à ta rencontre, avec quatre cents hommes.
Jacob fut très effrayé, et saisi d'angoisse. Il partagea en deux camps les gens qui étaient avec lui, les brebis, les boeufs et les chameaux;
et il dit: Si ésaü vient contre l'un des camps et le bat, le camp qui restera pourra se sauver.
Jacob dit: Dieu de mon père Abraham, Dieu de mon père Isaac, éternel, qui m'as dit: Retourne dans ton pays et dans ton lieu de naissance, et je te ferai du bien!
Je suis trop petit pour toutes les grâces et pour toute la fidélité dont tu as usé envers ton serviteur; car j'ai passé ce Jourdain avec mon bâton, et maintenant je forme deux camps.
Délivre-moi, je te prie, de la main de mon frère, de la main d'ésaü! car je crains qu'il ne vienne, et qu'il ne me frappe, avec la mère et les enfants.
Et toi, tu as dit: Je te ferai du bien, et je rendrai ta postérité comme le sable de la mer, si abondant qu'on ne saurait le compter.
C'est dans ce lieu-là que Jacob passa la nuit. Il prit de ce qu'il avait sous la main, pour faire un présent à ésaü, son frère:
deux cents chèvres et vingt boucs, deux cents brebis et vingt béliers,
trente femelles de chameaux avec leurs petits qu'elles allaitaient, quarante vaches et dix taureaux, vingt ânesses et dix ânes.
Il les remit à ses serviteurs, troupeau par troupeau séparément, et il dit à ses serviteurs: Passez devant moi, et mettez un intervalle entre chaque troupeau.
Il donna cet ordre au premier: Quand ésaü, mon frère, te rencontrera, et te demandera: A qui es-tu? où vas-tu? et à qui appartient ce troupeau devant toi?
tu répondras: A ton serviteur Jacob; c'est un présent envoyé à mon seigneur ésaü; et voici, il vient lui-même derrière nous.
Il donna le même ordre au second, au troisième, et à tous ceux qui suivaient les troupeaux: C'est ainsi que vous parlerez à mon seigneur ésaü, quand vous le rencontrerez.
Vous direz: Voici, ton serviteur Jacob vient aussi derrière nous. Car il se disait: Je l'apaiserai par ce présent qui va devant moi; ensuite je le verrai en face, et peut-être m'accueillera-t-il favorablement.
Le présent passa devant lui; et il resta cette nuit-là dans le camp.
Il se leva la même nuit, prit ses deux femmes, ses deux servantes, et ses onze enfants, et passa le gué de Jabbok.
Il les prit, leur fit passer le torrent, et le fit passer à tout ce qui lui appartenait.
Jacob demeura seul. Alors un homme lutta avec lui jusqu'au lever de l'aurore.
Voyant qu'il ne pouvait le vaincre, cet homme le frappa à l'emboîture de la hanche; et l'emboîture de la hanche de Jacob se démit pendant qu'il luttait avec lui.
Il dit: Laisse-moi aller, car l'aurore se lève. Et Jacob répondit: Je ne te laisserai point aller, que tu ne m'aies béni.
Il lui dit: Quel est ton nom? Et il répondit: Jacob.
Il dit encore: ton nom ne sera plus Jacob, mais tu seras appelé Israël; car tu as lutté avec Dieu et avec des hommes, et tu as été vainqueur.
Jacob l'interrogea, en disant: Fais-moi je te prie, connaître ton nom. Il répondit: Pourquoi demandes-tu mon nom? Et il le bénit là.
Jacob appela ce lieu du nom de Peniel: car, dit-il, j'ai vu Dieu face à face, et mon âme a été sauvée.
Le soleil se levait, lorsqu'il passa Peniel. Jacob boitait de la hanche.
C'est pourquoi jusqu'à ce jour, les enfants d'Israël ne mangent point le tendon qui est à l'emboîture de la hanche; car Dieu frappa Jacob à l'emboîture de la hanche, au tendon.
Jacob leva les yeux, et regarda; et voici, ésaü arrivait, avec quatre cents hommes. Il répartit les enfants entre Léa, Rachel, et les deux servantes.
Il plaça en tête les servantes avec leurs enfants, puis Léa avec ses enfants, et enfin Rachel avec Joseph.
Lui-même passa devant eux; et il se prosterna en terre sept fois, jusqu'à ce qu'il fût près de son frère.
ésaü courut à sa rencontre; il l'embrassa, se jeta à son cou, et le baisa. Et ils pleurèrent.
ésaü, levant les yeux, vit les femmes et les enfants, et il dit: Qui sont ceux que tu as là? Et Jacob répondit: Ce sont les enfants que Dieu a accordés à ton serviteur.
Les servantes s'approchèrent, elles et leurs enfants, et se prosternèrent;
Léa et ses enfants s'approchèrent aussi, et se prosternèrent; ensuite Joseph et Rachel s'approchèrent, et se prosternèrent.
ésaü dit: A quoi destines-tu tout ce camp que j'ai rencontré? Et Jacob répondit: A trouver grâce aux yeux de mon seigneur.
ésaü dit: Je suis dans l'abondance, mon frère; garde ce qui est à toi.
Et Jacob répondit: Non, je te prie, si j'ai trouvé grâce à tes yeux, accepte de ma main mon présent; car c'est pour cela que j'ai regardé ta face comme on regarde la face de Dieu, et tu m'as accueilli favorablement.
Accepte donc mon présent qui t'a été offert, puisque Dieu m'a comblé de grâces, et que je ne manque de rien. Il insista auprès de lui, et ésaü accepta.
ésaü dit: Partons, mettons-nous en route; j'irai devant toi.
Jacob lui répondit: Mon seigneur sait que les enfants sont délicats, et que j'ai des brebis et des vaches qui allaitent; si l'on forçait leur marche un seul jour, tout le troupeau périrait.
Que mon seigneur prenne les devants sur son serviteur; et moi, je suivrai lentement, au pas du troupeau qui me précédera, et au pas des enfants, jusqu'à ce que j'arrive chez mon seigneur, à Séir.
ésaü dit: Je veux au moins laisser avec toi une partie de mes gens. Et Jacob répondit: Pourquoi cela? Que je trouve seulement grâce aux yeux de mon seigneur!
Le même jour, ésaü reprit le chemin de Séir.
Jacob partit pour Succoth. Il bâtit une maison pour lui, et il fit des cabanes pour ses troupeaux. C'est pourquoi l'on a appelé ce lieu de nom de Succoth.
A son retour de Paddan Aram, Jacob arriva heureusement à la ville de Sichem, dans le pays de Canaan, et il campa devant la ville.
Il acheta la portion du champ où il avait dressé sa tente, des fils d'Hamor, père de Sichem, pour cent kesita.
Et là, il éleva un autel, qu'il appela El élohé Israël.
Dina, la fille que Léa avait enfantée à Jacob, sortit pour voir les filles du pays.
Elle fut aperçue de Sichem, fils de Hamor, prince du pays. Il l'enleva, coucha avec elle, et la déshonora.
Son coeur s'attacha à Dina, fille de Jacob; il aima la jeune fille, et sut parler à son coeur.
Et Sichem dit à Hamor, son père: Donne-moi cette jeune fille pour femme.
Jacob apprit qu'il avait déshonoré Dina, sa fille; et, comme ses fils étaient aux champs avec son troupeau, Jacob garda le silence jusqu'à leur retour.
Hamor, père de Sichem, se rendit auprès de Jacob pour lui parler.
Et les fils de Jacob revenaient des champs, lorsqu'ils apprirent la chose; ces hommes furent irrités et se mirent dans une grande colère, parce que Sichem avait commis une infamie en Israël, en couchant avec la fille de Jacob, ce qui n'aurait pas dû se faire.
Hamor leur adressa ainsi la parole: Le coeur de Sichem, mon fils, s'est attaché à votre fille; donnez-la-lui pour femme, je vous prie.
Alliez-vous avec nous; vous nous donnerez vos filles, et vous prendrez pour vous les nôtres.
Vous habiterez avec nous, et le pays sera à votre disposition; restez, pour y trafiquer et y acquérir des propriétés.
Sichem dit au père et aux frères de Dina: Que je trouve grâce à vos yeux, et je donnerai ce que vous me direz.
Exigez de moi une forte dot et beaucoup de présents, et je donnerai ce que vous me direz; mais accordez-moi pour femme la jeune fille.
Les fils de Jacob répondirent et parlèrent avec ruse à Sichem et à Hamor, son père, parce que Sichem avait déshonoré Dina, leur soeur.
Ils leur dirent: C'est une chose que nous ne pouvons pas faire, que de donner notre soeur à un homme incirconcis; car ce serait un opprobre pour nous.
Nous ne consentirons à votre désir qu'à la condition que vous deveniez comme nous, et que tout mâle parmi vous soit circoncis.
Nous vous donnerons alors nos filles, et nous prendrons pour nous les vôtres; nous habiterons avec vous, et nous formerons un seul peuple.
Mais si vous ne voulez pas nous écouter et vous faire circoncire, nous prendrons notre fille, et nous nous en irons.
Leurs paroles eurent l'assentiment de Hamor et de Sichem, fils de Hamor.
Le jeune homme ne tarda pas à faire la chose, car il aimait la fille de Jacob. Il était considéré de tous dans la maison de son père.
Hamor et Sichem, son fils, se rendirent à la porte de leur ville, et ils parlèrent ainsi aux gens de leur ville:
Ces hommes sont paisibles à notre égard; qu'ils restent dans le pays, et qu'ils y trafiquent; le pays est assez vaste pour eux. Nous prendrons pour femmes leurs filles, et nous leur donnerons nos filles.
Mais ces hommes ne consentiront à habiter avec nous, pour former un seul peuple, qu'à la condition que tout mâle parmi nous soit circoncis, comme ils sont eux-mêmes circoncis.
Leurs troupeaux, leurs biens et tout leur bétail, ne seront-ils pas à nous? Acceptons seulement leur condition, pour qu'ils restent avec nous.
Tous ceux qui étaient venus à la porte de la ville écoutèrent Hamor et Sichem, son fils; et tous les mâles se firent circoncire, tous ceux qui étaient venus à la porte de la ville.
Le troisième jour, pendant qu'ils étaient souffrants, les deux fils de Jacob, Siméon et Lévi, frères de Dina, prirent chacun leur épée, tombèrent sur la ville qui se croyait en sécurité, et tuèrent tous les mâles.
Ils passèrent aussi au fil de l'épée Hamor et Sichem, son fils; ils enlevèrent Dina de la maison de Sichem, et sortirent.
Les fils de Jacob se jetèrent sur les morts, et pillèrent la ville, parce qu'on avait déshonoré leur soeur.
Ils prirent leurs troupeaux, leurs boeufs et leurs ânes, ce qui était dans la ville et ce qui était dans les champs;
ils emmenèrent comme butin toutes leurs richesses, leurs enfants et leurs femmes, et tout ce qui se trouvait dans les maisons.
Alors Jacob dit à Siméon et à Lévi: Vous me troublez, en me rendant odieux aux habitants du pays, aux Cananéens et aux Phérésiens. Je n'ai qu'un petit nombre d'hommes; et ils se rassembleront contre moi, ils me frapperont, et je serai détruit, moi et ma maison.
Ils répondirent: Traitera-t-on notre soeur comme une prostituée?
Dieu dit à Jacob: Lève-toi, monte à Béthel, et demeures-y; là, tu dresseras un autel au Dieu qui t'apparut, lorsque tu fuyais ésaü, ton frère.
Jacob dit à sa maison et à tous ceux qui étaient avec lui: Otez les dieux étrangers qui sont au milieu de vous, purifiez-vous, et changez de vêtements.
Nous nous lèverons, et nous monterons à Béthel; là, je dresserai un autel au Dieu qui m'a exaucé dans le jour de ma détresse, et qui a été avec moi pendant le voyage que j'ai fait.
Ils donnèrent à Jacob tous les dieux étrangers qui étaient entre leurs mains, et les anneaux qui étaient à leurs oreilles. Jacob les enfouit sous le térébinthe qui est près de Sichem.
Ensuite ils partirent. La terreur de Dieu se répandit sur les villes qui les entouraient, et l'on ne poursuivit point les fils de Jacob.
Jacob arriva, lui et tous ceux qui étaient avec lui, à Luz, qui est Béthel, dans le pays de Canaan.
Il bâtit là un autel, et il appela ce lieu El Béthel; car c'est là que Dieu s'était révélé à lui lorsqu'il fuyait son frère.
Débora, nourrice de Rebecca, mourut; et elle fut enterrée au-dessous de Béthel, sous le chêne auquel on a donné le nom de chêne des pleurs.
Dieu apparut encore à Jacob, après son retour de Paddan Aram, et il le bénit.
Dieu lui dit: Ton nom est Jacob; tu ne seras plus appelé Jacob, mais ton nom sera Israël. Et il lui donna le nom d'Israël.
Dieu lui dit: Je suis le Dieu tout puissant. Sois fécond, et multiplie: une nation et une multitude de nations naîtront de toi, et des rois sortiront de tes reins.
Je te donnerai le pays que j'ai donné à Abraham et à Isaac, et je donnerai ce pays à ta postérité après toi.
Dieu s'éleva au-dessus de lui, dans le lieu où il lui avait parlé.
Et Jacob dressa un monument dans le lieu où Dieu lui avait parlé, un monument de pierres, sur lequel il fit une libation et versa de l'huile.
Jacob donna le nom de Béthel au lieu où Dieu lui avait parlé.
Ils partirent de Béthel; et il y avait encore une certaine distance jusqu'à éphrata, lorsque Rachel accoucha. Elle eut un accouchement pénible;
et pendant les douleurs de l'enfantement, la sage-femme lui dit: Ne crains point, car tu as encore un fils!
Et comme elle allait rendre l'âme, car elle était mourante, elle lui donna le nom de Ben Oni; mais le père l'appela Benjamin.
Rachel mourut, et elle fut enterrée sur le chemin d'éphrata, qui est Bethléhem.
Jacob éleva un monument sur son sépulcre; c'est le monument du sépulcre de Rachel, qui existe encore aujourd'hui.
Israël partit; et il dressa sa tente au delà de Migdal éder.
Pendant qu'Israël habitait cette contrée, Ruben alla coucher avec Bilha, concubine de son père. Et Israël l'apprit. Les fils de Jacob étaient au nombre de douze.
Fils de Léa: Ruben, premier-né de Jacob, Siméon, Lévi, Juda, Issacar et Zabulon.
Fils de Rachel: Joseph et Benjamin.
Fils de Bilha, servante de Rachel: Dan et Nephthali.
Fils de Zilpa, servante de Léa: Gad et Aser. Ce sont là les fils de Jacob, qui lui naquirent à Paddan Aram.
Jacob arriva auprès d'Isaac, son père, à Mamré, à Kirjath Arba, qui est Hébron, où avaient séjourné Abraham et Isaac.
Les jours d'Isaac furent de cent quatre-vingts ans.
Il expira et mourut, et il fut recueilli auprès de son peuple, âgé et rassasié de jours, et ésaü et Jacob, ses fils, l'enterrèrent.
Voici la postérité d'ésaü, qui est édom.
ésaü prit ses femmes parmi les filles de Canaan: Ada, fille d'élon, le Héthien; Oholibama, fille d'Ana, fille de Tsibeon, le Hévien;
et Basmath, fille d'Ismaël, soeur de Nebajoth.
Ada enfanta à ésaü éliphaz; Basmath enfanta Réuel;
et Oholibama enfanta Jéusch, Jaelam et Koré. Ce sont là les fils d'ésaü, qui lui naquirent dans le pays de Canaan.
ésaü prit ses femmes, ses fils et ses filles, toutes les personnes de sa maison, ses troupeaux, tout son bétail, et tout le bien qu'il avait acquis au pays de Canaan, et il s'en alla dans un autre pays, loin de Jacob, son frère.
Car leurs richesses étaient trop considérables pour qu'ils demeurassent ensemble, et la contrée où ils séjournaient ne pouvait plus leur suffire à cause de leurs troupeaux.
ésaü s'établit dans la montagne de Séir. ésaü, c'est édom.
Voici la postérité d'ésaü, père d'édom, dans la montagne de Séir.
Voici les noms des fils d'ésaü: éliphaz, fils d'Ada, femme d'ésaü; Réuel, fils de Basmath, femme d'ésaü.
Les fils d'éliphaz furent: Théman, Omar, Tsepho, Gaetham et Kenaz.
Et Thimna était la concubine d'éliphaz, fils d'ésaü: elle enfanta à éliphaz Amalek. Ce sont là les fils d'Ada, femme d'ésaü.
Voici les fils de Réuel: Nahath, Zérach, Schamma et Mizza. Ce sont là les fils de Basmath, femme d'ésaü.
Voici les fils d'Oholibama, fille d'Ana, fille de Tsibeon, femme d'ésaü: elle enfanta à ésaü Jéusch, Jaelam et Koré.
Voici les chefs de tribus issues des fils d'ésaü. -Voici les fils d'éliphaz, premier-né d'ésaü: le chef Théman, le chef Omar, le chef Tsepho, le chef Kenaz,
le chef Koré, le chef Gaetham, le chef Amalek. Ce sont là les chefs issus d'éliphaz, dans le pays d'édom. Ce sont les fils d'Ada.
Voici les fils de Réuel, fils d'ésaü: le chef Nahath, le chef Zérach, le chef Schamma, le chef Mizza. Ce sont là les chefs issus de Réuel, dans le pays d'édom. Ce sont là les fils de Basmath, femme d'ésaü.
Voici les fils d'Oholibama, femme d'ésaü: le chef Jéusch, le chef Jaelam, le chef Koré. Ce sont là les chefs issus d'Oholibama, fille d'Ana, femme d'ésaü.
Ce sont là les fils d'ésaü, et ce sont là leurs chefs de tribus. ésaü, c'est édom.
Voici les fils de Séir, le Horien, anciens habitants du pays: Lothan, Schobal, Tsibeon, Ana,
Dischon, Etser, et Dischan. Ce sont là les chefs des Horiens, fils de Séir, dans le pays d'édom.
Les fils de Lothan furent: Hori et Hémam. La soeur de Lothan fut Thimna.
Voici les fils de Schobal: Alvan, Manahath, ébal, Schepho et Onam.
Voici les fils de Tsibeon: Ajja et Ana. C'est cet Ana qui trouva les sources chaudes dans le désert, quand il faisait paître les ânes de Tsibeon, son père.
Voici les enfants d'Ana: Dischon, et Oholibama, fille d'Ana.
Voici les fils de Dischon: Hemdan, Eschban, Jithran et Karen.
Voici les fils d'Etser: Bilhan, Zaavan et Akan.
Voici les fils de Dischan: Uts et Aran.
Voici les chefs des Horiens: le chef Lothan, le chef Schobal, le chef Tsibeon, le chef Ana,
le chef Dischon, le chef Etser, le chef Dischan. Ce sont là les chefs des Horiens, les chefs qu'ils eurent dans le pays de Séir.
Voici les rois qui ont régné dans le pays d'édom, avant qu'un roi régnât sur les enfants d'Israël.
Béla, fils de Béor, régna sur édom; et le nom de sa ville était Dinhaba.
Béla mourut; et Jobab, fils de Zérach, de Botsra, régna à sa place.
Jobab mourut; et Huscham, du pays des Thémanites, régna à sa place.
Huscham mourut; et Hadad, fils de Bedad, régna à sa place. C'est lui qui frappa Madian dans les champs de Moab. Le nom de sa ville était Avith.
Hadad mourut; et Samla, de Masréka, régna à sa place.
Samla mourut; et Saül, de Rehoboth sur le fleuve, régna à sa place.
Saül mourut; et Baal Hanan, fils d'Acbor, régna à sa place.
Baal Hanan, fils d'Acbor, mourut; et Hadar régna à sa place. Le nom de sa ville était Pau; et le nom de sa femme Mehéthabeel, fille de Mathred, fille de Mézahab.
Voici les noms des chefs issus d'ésaü, selon leurs tribus, selon leurs territoires, et d'après leurs noms: le chef Thimna, le chef Alva, le chef Jetheth,
le chef Oholibama, le chef éla, le chef Pinon,
le chef Kenaz, le chef Théman, le chef Mibtsar,
le chef Magdiel, le chef Iram. Ce sont là les chefs d'édom, selon leurs habitations dans le pays qu'ils possédaient. C'est là ésaü, père d'édom.
Jacob demeura dans le pays de Canaan, où avait séjourné son père.
Voici la postérité de Jacob. Joseph, âgé de dix-sept ans, faisait paître le troupeau avec ses frères; cet enfant était auprès des fils de Bilha et des fils de Zilpa, femmes de son père. Et Joseph rapportait à leur père leurs mauvais propos.
Israël aimait Joseph plus que tous ses autres fils, parce qu'il l'avait eu dans sa vieillesse; et il lui fit une tunique de plusieurs couleurs.
Ses frères virent que leur père l'aimait plus qu'eux tous, et ils le prirent en haine. Ils ne pouvaient lui parler avec amitié.
Joseph eut un songe, et il le raconta à ses frères, qui le haïrent encore davantage.
Il leur dit: écoutez donc ce songe que j'ai eu!
Nous étions à lier des gerbes au milieu des champs; et voici, ma gerbe se leva et se tint debout, et vos gerbes l'entourèrent et se prosternèrent devant elle.
Ses frères lui dirent: Est-ce que tu régneras sur nous? est-ce que tu nous gouverneras? Et ils le haïrent encore davantage, à cause de ses songes et à cause de ses paroles.
Il eut encore un autre songe, et il le raconta à ses frères. Il dit: J'ai eu encore un songe! Et voici, le soleil, la lune et onze étoiles se prosternaient devant moi.
Il le raconta à son père et à ses frères. Son père le réprimanda, et lui dit: Que signifie ce songe que tu as eu? Faut-il que nous venions, moi, ta mère et tes frères, nous prosterner en terre devant toi?
Ses frères eurent de l'envie contre lui, mais son père garda le souvenir de ces choses.
Les frères de Joseph étant allés à Sichem, pour faire paître le troupeau de leur père,
Israël dit à Joseph: Tes frères ne font-ils pas paître le troupeau à Sichem? Viens, je veux t'envoyer vers eux. Et il répondit: Me voici!
Israël lui dit: Va, je te prie, et vois si tes frères sont en bonne santé et si le troupeau est en bon état; et tu m'en rapporteras des nouvelles. Il l'envoya ainsi de la vallée d'Hébron; et Joseph alla à Sichem.
Un homme le rencontra, comme il errait dans les champs. Il le questionna, en disant: Que cherches-tu?
Joseph répondit: Je cherche mes frères; dis-moi, je te prie, où ils font paître leur troupeau.
Et l'homme dit: Ils sont partis d'ici; car je les ai entendus dire: Allons à Dothan. Joseph alla après ses frères, et il les trouva à Dothan.
Ils le virent de loin; et, avant qu'il fût près d'eux, ils complotèrent de le faire mourir.
Ils se dirent l'un à l'autre: Voici le faiseur de songes qui arrive.
Venez maintenant, tuons-le, et jetons-le dans une des citernes; nous dirons qu'une bête féroce l'a dévoré, et nous verrons ce que deviendront ses songes.
Ruben entendit cela, et il le délivra de leurs mains. Il dit: Ne lui ôtons pas la vie.
Ruben leur dit: Ne répandez point de sang; jetez-le dans cette citerne qui est au désert, et ne mettez pas la main sur lui. Il avait dessein de le délivrer de leurs mains pour le faire retourner vers son père.
Lorsque Joseph fut arrivé auprès de ses frères, ils le dépouillèrent de sa tunique, de la tunique de plusieurs couleurs, qu'il avait sur lui.
Ils le prirent, et le jetèrent dans la citerne. Cette citerne était vide; il n'y avait point d'eau.
Ils s'assirent ensuite pour manger. Ayant levé les yeux, ils virent une caravane d'Ismaélites venant de Galaad; leurs chameaux étaient chargés d'aromates, de baume et de myrrhe, qu'ils transportaient en égypte.
Alors Juda dit à ses frères: Que gagnerons-nous à tuer notre frère et à cacher son sang?
Venez, vendons-le aux Ismaélites, et ne mettons pas la main sur lui, car il est notre frère, notre chair. Et ses frères l'écoutèrent.
Au passage des marchands madianites, ils tirèrent et firent remonter Joseph hors de la citerne; et ils le vendirent pour vingt sicles d'argent aux Ismaélites, qui l'emmenèrent en égypte.
Ruben revint à la citerne; et voici, Joseph n'était plus dans la citerne. Il déchira ses vêtements,
retourna vers ses frères, et dit: L'enfant n'y est plus! Et moi, où irai-je?
Ils prirent alors la tunique de Joseph; et, ayant tué un bouc, ils plongèrent la tunique dans le sang.
Ils envoyèrent à leur père la tunique de plusieurs couleurs, en lui faisant dire: Voici ce que nous avons trouvé! reconnais si c'est la tunique de ton fils, ou non.
Jacob la reconnut, et dit: C'est la tunique de mon fils! une bête féroce l'a dévoré! Joseph a été mis en pièces!
Et il déchira ses vêtements, il mit un sac sur ses reins, et il porta longtemps le deuil de son fils.
Tous ses fils et toutes ses filles vinrent pour le consoler; mais il ne voulut recevoir aucune consolation. Il disait: C'est en pleurant que je descendrai vers mon fils au séjour des morts! Et il pleurait son fils.
Les Madianites le vendirent en égypte à Potiphar, officier de Pharaon, chef des gardes.
En ce temps-là, Juda s'éloigna de ses frères, et se retira vers un homme d'Adullam, nommé Hira.
Là, Juda vit la fille d'un Cananéen, nommé Schua; il la prit pour femme, et alla vers elle.
Elle devint enceinte, et enfanta un fils, qu'elle appela Er.
Elle devint encore enceinte, et enfanta un fils, qu'elle appela Onan.
Elle enfanta de nouveau un fils, qu'elle appela Schéla; Juda était à Czib quand elle l'enfanta.
Juda prit pour Er, son premier-né, une femme nommée Tamar.
Er, premier-né de Juda, était méchant aux yeux de l'éternel; et l'éternel le fit mourir.
Alors Juda dit à Onan: Va vers la femme de ton frère, prends-la, comme beau-frère, et suscite une postérité à ton frère.
Onan, sachant que cette postérité ne serait pas à lui, se souillait à terre lorsqu'il allait vers la femme de son frère, afin de ne pas donner de postérité à son frère.
Ce qu'il faisait déplut à l'éternel, qui le fit aussi mourir.
Alors Juda dit à Tamar, sa belle-fille: Demeure veuve dans la maison de ton père, jusqu'à ce que Schéla, mon fils, soit grand. Il parlait ainsi dans la crainte que Schéla ne mourût comme ses frères. Tamar s'en alla, et elle habita dans la maison de son père.
Les jours s'écoulèrent, et la fille de Schua, femme de Juda, mourut. Lorsque Juda fut consolé, il monta à Thimna, vers ceux qui tondaient ses brebis, lui et son ami Hira, l'Adullamite.
On en informa Tamar, et on lui dit: Voici ton beau-père qui monte à Thimna, pour tondre ses brebis.
Alors elle ôta ses habits de veuve, elle se couvrit d'un voile et s'enveloppa, et elle s'assit à l'entrée d'énaïm, sur le chemin de Thimna; car elle voyait que Schéla était devenu grand, et qu'elle ne lui était point donnée pour femme.
Juda la vit, et la prit pour une prostituée, parce qu'elle avait couvert son visage.
Il l'aborda sur le chemin, et dit: Laisse-moi aller vers toi. Car il ne connut pas que c'était sa belle-fille. Elle dit: Que me donneras-tu pour venir vers moi?
Il répondit: Je t'enverrai un chevreau de mon troupeau. Elle dit: Me donneras-tu un gage, jusqu'à ce que tu l'envoies?
Il répondit: Quel gage te donnerai-je? Elle dit: Ton cachet, ton cordon, et le bâton que tu as à la main. Il les lui donna. Puis il alla vers elle; et elle devint enceinte de lui.
Elle se leva, et s'en alla; elle ôta son voile, et remit ses habits de veuve.
Juda envoya le chevreau par son ami l'Adullamite, pour retirer le gage des mains de la femme. Mais il ne la trouva point.
Il interrogea les gens du lieu, en disant: Où est cette prostituée qui se tenait à énaïm, sur le chemin? Ils répondirent: Il n'y a point eu ici de prostituée.
Il retourna auprès de Juda, et dit: Je ne l'ai pas trouvée, et même les gens du lieu ont dit: Il n'y a point eu ici de prostituée.
Juda dit: Qu'elle garde ce qu'elle a! Ne nous exposons pas au mépris. Voici, j'ai envoyé ce chevreau, et tu ne l'as pas trouvée.
Environ trois mois après, on vint dire à Juda: Tamar, ta belle-fille, s'est prostituée, et même la voilà enceinte à la suite de sa prostitution. Et Juda dit: Faites-la sortir, et qu'elle soit brûlée.
Comme on l'amenait dehors, elle fit dire à son beau-père: C'est de l'homme à qui ces choses appartiennent que je suis enceinte; reconnais, je te prie, à qui sont ce cachet, ces cordons et ce bâton.
Juda les reconnut, et dit: Elle est moins coupable que moi, puisque je ne l'ai pas donnée à Schéla, mon fils. Et il ne la connut plus.
Quand elle fut au moment d'accoucher, voici, il y avait deux jumeaux dans son ventre.
Et pendant l'accouchement il y en eut un qui présenta la main; la sage-femme la prit, et y attacha un fil cramoisi, en disant: Celui-ci sort le premier.
Mais il retira la main, et son frère sortit. Alors la sage-femme dit: Quelle brèche tu as faite! Et elle lui donna le nom de Pérets.
Ensuite sortit son frère, qui avait à la main le fil cramoisi; et on lui donna le nom de Zérach.
On fit descendre Joseph en égypte; et Potiphar, officier de Pharaon, chef des gardes, égyptien, l'acheta des Ismaélites qui l'y avaient fait descendre.
L'éternel fut avec lui, et la prospérité l'accompagna; il habitait dans la maison de son maître, l'égyptien.
Son maître vit que l'éternel était avec lui, et que l'éternel faisait prospérer entre ses mains tout ce qu'il entreprenait.
Joseph trouva grâce aux yeux de son maître, qui l'employa à son service, l'établit sur sa maison, et lui confia tout ce qu'il possédait.
Dès que Potiphar l'eut établi sur sa maison et sur tout ce qu'il possédait, l'éternel bénit la maison de l'égyptien, à cause de Joseph; et la bénédiction de l'éternel fut sur tout ce qui lui appartenait, soit à la maison, soit aux champs.
Il abandonna aux mains de Joseph tout ce qui lui appartenait, et il n'avait avec lui d'autre soin que celui de prendre sa nourriture. Or, Joseph était beau de taille et beau de figure.
Après ces choses, il arriva que la femme de son maître porta les yeux sur Joseph, et dit: Couche avec moi!
Il refusa, et dit à la femme de son maître: Voici, mon maître ne prend avec moi connaissance de rien dans la maison, et il a remis entre mes mains tout ce qui lui appartient.
Il n'est pas plus grand que moi dans cette maison, et il ne m'a rien interdit, excepté toi, parce que tu es sa femme. Comment ferais-je un aussi grand mal et pécherais-je contre Dieu?
Quoiqu'elle parlât tous les jours à Joseph, il refusa de coucher auprès d'elle, d'être avec elle.
Un jour qu'il était entré dans la maison pour faire son ouvrage, et qu'il n'y avait là aucun des gens de la maison,
elle le saisit par son vêtement, en disant: Couche avec moi! Il lui laissa son vêtement dans la main, et s'enfuit au dehors.
Lorsqu'elle vit qu'il lui avait laissé son vêtement dans la main, et qu'il s'était enfui dehors,
elle appela les gens de sa maison, et leur dit: Voyez, il nous a amené un Hébreu pour se jouer de nous. Cet homme est venu vers moi pour coucher avec moi; mais j'ai crié à haute voix.
Et quand il a entendu que j'élevais la voix et que je criais, il a laissé son vêtement à côté de moi et s'est enfui dehors.
Et elle posa le vêtement de Joseph à côté d'elle, jusqu'à ce que son maître rentrât à la maison.
Alors elle lui parla ainsi: L'esclave hébreu que tu nous as amené est venu vers moi pour se jouer de moi.
Et comme j'ai élevé la voix et que j'ai crié, il a laissé son vêtement à côté de moi et s'est enfui dehors.
Après avoir entendu les paroles de sa femme, qui lui disait: Voilà ce que m'a fait ton esclave! le maître de Joseph fut enflammé de colère.
Il prit Joseph, et le mit dans la prison, dans le lieu où les prisonniers du roi étaient enfermés: il fut là, en prison.
L'éternel fut avec Joseph, et il étendit sur lui sa bonté. Il le mit en faveur aux yeux du chef de la prison.
Et le chef de la prison plaça sous sa surveillance tous les prisonniers qui étaient dans la prison; et rien ne s'y faisait que par lui.
Le chef de la prison ne prenait aucune connaissance de ce que Joseph avait en main, parce que l'éternel était avec lui. Et l'éternel donnait de la réussite à ce qu'il faisait.
Après ces choses, il arriva que l'échanson et le panetier du roi d'égypte, offensèrent leur maître, le roi d'égypte.
Pharaon fut irrité contre ses deux officiers, le chef des échansons et le chef des panetiers.
Et il les fit mettre dans la maison du chef des gardes, dans la prison, dans le lieu où Joseph était enfermé.
Le chef des gardes les plaça sous la surveillance de Joseph, qui faisait le service auprès d'eux; et ils passèrent un certain temps en prison.
Pendant une même nuit, l'échanson et le panetier du roi d'égypte, qui étaient enfermés dans la prison, eurent tous les deux un songe, chacun le sien, pouvant recevoir une explication distincte.
Joseph, étant venu le matin vers eux, les regarda; et voici, ils étaient tristes.
Alors il questionna les officiers de Pharaon, qui étaient avec lui dans la prison de son maître, et il leur dit: Pourquoi avez-vous mauvais visage aujourd'hui?
Ils lui répondirent: Nous avons eu un songe, et il n'y a personne pour l'expliquer. Joseph leur dit: N'est-ce pas à Dieu qu'appartiennent les explications? Racontez-moi donc votre songe.
Le chef des échansons raconta son songe à Joseph, et lui dit: Dans mon songe, voici, il y avait un cep devant moi.
Ce cep avait trois sarments. Quand il eut poussé, sa fleur se développa et ses grappes donnèrent des raisins mûrs.
La coupe de Pharaon était dans ma main. Je pris les raisins, je les pressai dans la coupe de Pharaon, et je mis la coupe dans la main de Pharaon.
Joseph lui dit: En voici l'explication. Les trois sarments sont trois jours.
Encore trois jours, et Pharaon relèvera ta tête et te rétablira dans ta charge; tu mettras la coupe dans la main de Pharaon, comme tu en avais l'habitude lorsque tu étais son échanson.
Mais souviens-toi de moi, quand tu seras heureux, et montre, je te prie, de la bonté à mon égard; parle en ma faveur à Pharaon, et fais-moi sortir de cette maison.
Car j'ai été enlevé du pays des Hébreux, et ici même je n'ai rien fait pour être mis en prison.
Le chef des panetiers, voyant que Joseph avait donné une explication favorable, dit: Voici, il y avait aussi, dans mon songe, trois corbeilles de pain blanc sur ma tête.
Dans la corbeille la plus élevée il y avait pour Pharaon des mets de toute espèce, cuits au four; et les oiseaux les mangeaient dans la corbeille au-dessus de ma tête.
Joseph répondit, et dit: En voici l'explication. Les trois corbeilles sont trois jours.
Encore trois jours, et Pharaon enlèvera ta tête de dessus toi, te fera pendre à un bois, et les oiseaux mangeront ta chair.
Le troisième jour, jour de la naissance de Pharaon, il fit un festin à tous ses serviteurs; et il éleva la tête du chef des échansons et la tête du chef des panetiers, au milieu de ses serviteurs:
il rétablit le chef des échansons dans sa charge d'échanson, pour qu'il mît la coupe dans la main de Pharaon;
mais il fit pendre le chef des panetiers, selon l'explication que Joseph leur avait donnée.
Le chef des échansons ne pensa plus à Joseph. Il l'oublia.
Au bout de deux ans, Pharaon eut un songe. Voici, il se tenait près du fleuve.
Et voici, sept vaches belles à voir et grasses de chair montèrent hors du fleuve, et se mirent à paître dans la prairie.
Sept autres vaches laides à voir et maigres de chair montèrent derrière elles hors du fleuve, et se tinrent à leurs côtés sur le bord du fleuve.
Les vaches laides à voir et maigres de chair mangèrent les sept vaches belles à voir et grasses de chair. Et Pharaon s'éveilla.
Il se rendormit, et il eut un second songe. Voici, sept épis gras et beaux montèrent sur une même tige.
Et sept épis maigres et brûlés par le vent d'orient poussèrent après eux.
Les épis maigres engloutirent les sept épis gras et pleins. Et Pharaon s'éveilla. Voilà le songe.
Le matin, Pharaon eut l'esprit agité, et il fit appeler tous les magiciens et tous les sages de l'égypte. Il leur raconta ses songes. Mais personne ne put les expliquer à Pharaon.
Alors le chef des échansons prit la parole, et dit à Pharaon: Je vais rappeler aujourd'hui le souvenir de ma faute.
Pharaon s'était irrité contre ses serviteurs; et il m'avait fait mettre en prison dans la maison du chef des gardes, moi et le chef des panetiers.
Nous eûmes l'un et l'autre un songe dans une même nuit; et chacun de nous reçut une explication en rapport avec le songe qu'il avait eu.
Il y avait là avec nous un jeune Hébreu, esclave du chef des gardes. Nous lui racontâmes nos songes, et il nous les expliqua.
Les choses sont arrivées selon l'explication qu'il nous avait donnée. Pharaon me rétablit dans ma charge, et il fit pendre le chef des panetiers.
Pharaon fit appeler Joseph. On le fit sortir en hâte de prison. Il se rasa, changea de vêtements, et se rendit vers Pharaon.
Pharaon dit à Joseph: J'ai eu un songe. Personne ne peut l'expliquer; et j'ai appris que tu expliques un songe, après l'avoir entendu.
Joseph répondit à Pharaon, en disant: Ce n'est pas moi! c'est Dieu qui donnera une réponse favorable à Pharaon.
Pharaon dit alors à Joseph: Dans mon songe, voici, je me tenais sur le bord du fleuve.
Et voici, sept vaches grasses de chair et belles d'apparence montèrent hors du fleuve, et se mirent à paître dans la prairie.
Sept autres vaches montèrent derrière elles, maigres, fort laides d'apparence, et décharnées: je n'en ai point vu d'aussi laides dans tout le pays d'égypte.
Les vaches décharnées et laides mangèrent les sept premières vaches qui étaient grasses.
Elles les engloutirent dans leur ventre, sans qu'on s'aperçût qu'elles y fussent entrées; et leur apparence était laide comme auparavant. Et je m'éveillai.
Je vis encore en songe sept épis pleins et beaux, qui montèrent sur une même tige.
Et sept épis vides, maigres, brûlés par le vent d'orient, poussèrent après eux.
Les épis maigres engloutirent les sept beaux épis. Je l'ai dit aux magiciens, mais personne ne m'a donné l'explication.
Joseph dit à Pharaon: Ce qu'a songé Pharaon est une seule chose; Dieu a fait connaître à Pharaon ce qu'il va faire.
Les sept vaches belles sont sept années: et les sept épis beaux sont sept années: c'est un seul songe.
Les sept vaches décharnées et laides, qui montaient derrière les premières, sont sept années; et les sept épis vides, brûlés par le vent d'orient, seront sept années de famine.
Ainsi, comme je viens de le dire à Pharaon, Dieu a fait connaître à Pharaon ce qu'il va faire.
Voici, il y aura sept années de grande abondance dans tout le pays d'égypte.
Sept années de famine viendront après elles; et l'on oubliera toute cette abondance au pays d'égypte, et la famine consumera le pays.
Cette famine qui suivra sera si forte qu'on ne s'apercevra plus de l'abondance dans le pays.
Si Pharaon a vu le songe se répéter une seconde fois, c'est que la chose est arrêtée de la part de Dieu, et que Dieu se hâtera de l'exécuter.
Maintenant, que Pharaon choisisse un homme intelligent et sage, et qu'il le mette à la tête du pays d'égypte.
Que Pharaon établisse des commissaires sur le pays, pour lever un cinquième des récoltes de l'égypte pendant les sept années d'abondance.
Qu'ils rassemblent tous les produits de ces bonnes années qui vont venir; qu'ils fassent, sous l'autorité de Pharaon, des amas de blé, des approvisionnements dans les villes, et qu'ils en aient la garde.
Ces provisions seront en réserve pour le pays, pour les sept années de famine qui arriveront dans le pays d'égypte, afin que le pays ne soit pas consumé par la famine.
Ces paroles plurent à Pharaon et à tous ses serviteurs.
Et Pharaon dit à ses serviteurs: Trouverions-nous un homme comme celui-ci, ayant en lui l'esprit de Dieu?
Et Pharaon dit à Joseph: Puisque Dieu t'a fait connaître toutes ces choses, il n'y a personne qui soit aussi intelligent et aussi sage que toi.
Je t'établis sur ma maison, et tout mon peuple obéira à tes ordres. Le trône seul m'élèvera au-dessus de toi.
Pharaon dit à Joseph: Vois, je te donne le commandement de tout le pays d'égypte.
Pharaon ôta son anneau de la main, et le mit à la main de Joseph; il le revêtit d'habits de fin lin, et lui mit un collier d'or au cou.
Il le fit monter sur le char qui suivait le sien; et l'on criait devant lui: A genoux! C'est ainsi que Pharaon lui donna le commandement de tout le pays d'égypte.
Il dit encore à Joseph: Je suis Pharaon! Et sans toi personne ne lèvera la main ni le pied dans tout le pays d'égypte.
Pharaon appela Joseph du nom de Tsaphnath Paenéach; et il lui donna pour femme Asnath, fille de Poti Phéra, prêtre d'On. Et Joseph partit pour visiter le pays d'égypte.
Joseph était âgé de trente ans lorsqu'il se présenta devant Pharaon, roi d'égypte; et il quitta Pharaon, et parcourut tout le pays d'égypte.
Pendant les sept années de fertilité, la terre rapporta abondamment.
Joseph rassembla tous les produits de ces sept années dans le pays d'égypte; il fit des approvisionnements dans les villes, mettant dans l'intérieur de chaque ville les productions des champs d'alentour.
Joseph amassa du blé, comme le sable de la mer, en quantité si considérable que l'on cessa de compter, parce qu'il n'y avait plus de nombre.
Avant les années de famine, il naquit à Joseph deux fils, que lui enfanta Asnath, fille de Poti Phéra, prêtre d'On.
Joseph donna au premier-né le nom de Manassé, car, dit-il, Dieu m'a fait oublier toutes mes peines et toute la maison de mon père.
Et il donna au second le nom d'éphraïm, car, dit-il, Dieu m'a rendu fécond dans le pays de mon affliction.
Les sept années d'abondance qu'il y eut au pays d'égypte s'écoulèrent.
Et les sept années de famine commencèrent à venir, ainsi que Joseph l'avait annoncé. Il y eut famine dans tous les pays; mais dans tout le pays d'égypte il y avait du pain.
Quand tout le pays d'égypte fut aussi affamé, le peuple cria à Pharaon pour avoir du pain. Pharaon dit à tous les égyptiens: Allez vers Joseph, et faites ce qu'il vous dira.
La famine régnait dans tout le pays. Joseph ouvrit tous les lieux d'approvisionnement, et vendit du blé aux égyptiens. La famine augmentait dans le pays d'égypte.
Et de tous les pays on arrivait en égypte, pour acheter du blé auprès de Joseph; car la famine était forte dans tous les pays.
Jacob, voyant qu'il y avait du blé en égypte, dit à ses fils: Pourquoi vous regardez-vous les uns les autres?
Il dit: Voici, j'apprends qu'il y a du blé en égypte; descendez-y, pour nous en acheter là, afin que nous vivions et que nous ne mourions pas.
Dix frères de Joseph descendirent en égypte, pour acheter du blé.
Jacob n'envoya point avec eux Benjamin, frère de Joseph, dans la crainte qu'il ne lui arrivât quelque malheur.
Les fils d'Israël vinrent pour acheter du blé, au milieu de ceux qui venaient aussi; car la famine était dans le pays de Canaan.
Joseph commandait dans le pays; c'est lui qui vendait du blé à tout le peuple du pays. Les frères de Joseph vinrent, et se prosternèrent devant lui la face contre terre.
Joseph vit ses frères et les reconnut; mais il feignit d'être un étranger pour eux, il leur parla durement, et leur dit: D'où venez-vous? Ils répondirent: Du pays de Canaan, pour acheter des vivres.
Joseph reconnut ses frères, mais eux ne le reconnurent pas.
Joseph se souvint des songes qu'il avait eus à leur sujet, et il leur dit: Vous êtes des espions; c'est pour observer les lieux faibles du pays que vous êtes venus.
Ils lui répondirent: Non, mon seigneur, tes serviteurs sont venus pour acheter du blé.
Nous sommes tous fils d'un même homme; nous sommes sincères, tes serviteurs ne sont pas des espions.
Il leur dit: Nullement; c'est pour observer les lieux faibles du pays que vous êtes venus.
Ils répondirent: Nous, tes serviteurs, sommes douze frères, fils d'un même homme au pays de Canaan; et voici, le plus jeune est aujourd'hui avec notre père, et il y en a un qui n'est plus.
Joseph leur dit: Je viens de vous le dire, vous êtes des espions.
Voici comment vous serez éprouvés. Par la vie de Pharaon! vous ne sortirez point d'ici que votre jeune frère ne soit venu.
Envoyez l'un de vous pour chercher votre frère; et vous, restez prisonniers. Vos paroles seront éprouvées, et je saurai si la vérité est chez vous; sinon, par la vie de Pharaon! vous êtes des espions.
Et il les mit ensemble trois jours en prison.
Le troisième jour, Joseph leur dit: Faites ceci, et vous vivrez. Je crains Dieu!
Si vous êtes sincères, que l'un de vos frères reste enfermé dans votre prison; et vous, partez, emportez du blé pour nourrir vos familles,
et amenez-moi votre jeune frère, afin que vos paroles soient éprouvées et que vous ne mouriez point. Et ils firent ainsi.
Ils se dirent alors l'un à l'autre: Oui, nous avons été coupables envers notre frère, car nous avons vu l'angoisse de son âme, quand il nous demandait grâce, et nous ne l'avons point écouté! C'est pour cela que cette affliction nous arrive.
Ruben, prenant la parole, leur dit: Ne vous disais-je pas: Ne commettez point un crime envers cet enfant? Mais vous n'avez point écouté. Et voici, son sang est redemandé.
Ils ne savaient pas que Joseph comprenait, car il se servait avec eux d'un interprète.
Il s'éloigna d'eux, pour pleurer. Il revint, et leur parla; puis il prit parmi eux Siméon, et le fit enchaîner sous leurs yeux.
Joseph ordonna qu'on remplît de blé leurs sacs, qu'on remît l'argent de chacun dans son sac, et qu'on leur donnât des provisions pour la route. Et l'on fit ainsi.
Ils chargèrent le blé sur leurs ânes, et partirent.
L'un d'eux ouvrit son sac pour donner du fourrage à son âne, dans le lieu où ils passèrent la nuit, et il vit l'argent qui était à l'entrée du sac.
Il dit à ses frères: Mon argent a été rendu, et le voici dans mon sac. Alors leur coeur fut en défaillance; et ils se dirent l'un à l'autre, en tremblant: Qu'est-ce que Dieu nous a fait?
Ils revinrent auprès de Jacob, leur père, dans le pays de Canaan, et ils lui racontèrent tout ce qui leur était arrivé. Ils dirent:
L'homme, qui est le seigneur du pays, nous a parlé durement, et il nous a pris pour des espions.
Nous lui avons dit: Nous sommes sincères, nous ne sommes pas des espions.
Nous sommes douze frères, fils de notre père; l'un n'est plus, et le plus jeune est aujourd'hui avec notre père au pays de Canaan.
Et l'homme, qui est le seigneur du pays, nous a dit: Voici comment je saurai si vous êtes sincères. Laissez auprès de moi l'un de vos frères, prenez de quoi nourrir vos familles, partez, et amenez-moi votre jeune frère.
Je saurai ainsi que vous n'êtes pas des espions, que vous êtes sincères; je vous rendrai votre frère, et vous pourrez librement parcourir le pays.
Lorsqu'ils vidèrent leurs sacs, voici, le paquet d'argent de chacun était dans son sac. Ils virent, eux et leur père, leurs paquets d'argent, et ils eurent peur.
Jacob, leur père, leur dit: Vous me privez de mes enfants! Joseph n'est plus, Siméon n'est plus, et vous prendriez Benjamin! C'est sur moi que tout cela retombe.
Ruben dit à son père: Tu feras mourir mes deux fils si je ne te ramène pas Benjamin; remets-le entre mes mains, et je te le ramènerai.
Jacob dit: Mon fils ne descendra point avec vous; car son frère est mort, et il reste seul; s'il lui arrivait un malheur dans le voyage que vous allez faire, vous feriez descendre mes cheveux blancs avec douleur dans le séjour des morts.
La famine s'appesantissait sur le pays.
Quand ils eurent fini de manger le blé qu'ils avaient apporté d'égypte, Jacob dit à ses fils: Retournez, achetez-nous un peu de vivres.
Juda lui répondit: Cet homme nous a fait cette déclaration formelle: Vous ne verrez pas ma face, à moins que votre frère ne soit avec vous.
Si donc tu veux envoyer notre frère avec nous, nous descendrons, et nous t'achèterons des vivres.
Mais si tu ne veux pas l'envoyer, nous ne descendrons point, car cet homme nous a dit: Vous ne verrez pas ma face, à moins que votre frère ne soit avec vous.
Israël dit alors: Pourquoi avez-vous mal agi à mon égard, en disant à cet homme que vous aviez encore un frère?
Ils répondirent: Cet homme nous a interrogés sur nous et sur notre famille, en disant: Votre père vit-il encore? avez-vous un frère? Et nous avons répondu à ces questions. Pouvions-nous savoir qu'il dirait: Faites descendre votre frère?
Juda dit à Israël, son père: Laisse venir l'enfant avec moi, afin que nous nous levions et que nous partions; et nous vivrons et ne mourrons pas, nous, toi, et nos enfants.
Je réponds de lui; tu le redemanderas de ma main. Si je ne le ramène pas auprès de toi et si je ne le remets pas devant ta face, je serai pour toujours coupable envers toi.
Car si nous n'eussions pas tardé, nous serions maintenant deux fois de retour.
Israël, leur père, leur dit: Puisqu'il le faut, faites ceci. Prenez dans vos sacs des meilleures productions du pays, pour en porter un présent à cet homme, un peu de baume et un peu de miel, des aromates, de la myrrhe, des pistaches et des amandes.
Prenez avec vous de l'argent au double, et remportez l'argent qu'on avait mis à l'entrée de vos sacs: peut-être était-ce une erreur.
Prenez votre frère, et levez-vous; retournez vers cet homme.
Que le Dieu tout puissant vous fasse trouver grâce devant cet homme, et qu'il laisse revenir avec vous votre autre frère et Benjamin! Et moi, si je dois être privé de mes enfants, que j'en sois privé!
Ils prirent le présent; ils prirent avec eux de l'argent au double, ainsi que Benjamin; ils se levèrent, descendirent en égypte, et se présentèrent devant Joseph.
Dès que Joseph vit avec eux Benjamin, il dit à son intendant: Fais entrer ces gens dans la maison, tue et apprête; car ces gens mangeront avec moi à midi.
Cet homme fit ce que Joseph avait ordonné, et il conduisit ces gens dans la maison de Joseph.
Ils eurent peur lorsqu'ils furent conduits à la maison de Joseph, et ils dirent: C'est à cause de l'argent remis l'autre fois dans nos sacs qu'on nous emmène; c'est pour se jeter sur nous, se précipiter sur nous; c'est pour nous prendre comme esclaves, et s'emparer de nos ânes.
Ils s'approchèrent de l'intendant de la maison de Joseph, et lui adressèrent la parole, à l'entrée de la maison.
Ils dirent: Pardon! mon seigneur, nous sommes déjà descendus une fois pour acheter des vivres.
Puis, quand nous arrivâmes, au lieu où nous devions passer la nuit, nous avons ouvert nos sacs; et voici, l'argent de chacun était à l'entrée de son sac, notre argent selon son poids: nous le rapportons avec nous.
Nous avons aussi apporté d'autre argent, pour acheter des vivres. Nous ne savons pas qui avait mis notre argent dans nos sacs.
L'intendant répondit: Que la paix soit avec vous! Ne craignez rien. C'est votre Dieu, le Dieu de votre père, qui vous a donné un trésor dans vos sacs. Votre argent m'est parvenu. Et il leur amena Siméon.
Cet homme les fit entrer dans la maison de Joseph; il leur donna de l'eau et ils se lavèrent les pieds; il donna aussi du fourrage à leurs ânes.
Ils préparèrent leur présent, en attendant que Joseph vienne à midi; car on les avait informés qu'ils mangeraient chez lui.
Quand Joseph fut arrivé à la maison, ils lui offrirent le présent qu'ils avaient apporté, et ils se prosternèrent en terre devant lui.
Il leur demanda comment ils se portaient; et il dit: Votre vieux père, dont vous avez parlé, est-il en bonne santé? vit-il encore?
Ils répondirent: Ton serviteur, notre père, est en bonne santé; il vit encore. Et ils s'inclinèrent et se prosternèrent.
Joseph leva les yeux; et, jetant un regard sur Benjamin, son frère, fils de sa mère, il dit: Est-ce là votre jeune frère, dont vous m'avez parlé? Et il ajouta: Dieu te fasse miséricorde, mon fils!
Ses entrailles étaient émues pour son frère, et il avait besoin de pleurer; il entra précipitamment dans une chambre, et il y pleura.
Après s'être lavé le visage, il en sortit; et, faisant des efforts pour se contenir, il dit: Servez à manger.
On servit Joseph à part, et ses frères à part; les égyptiens qui mangeaient avec lui furent aussi servis à part, car les égyptiens ne pouvaient pas manger avec les Hébreux, parce que c'est à leurs yeux une abomination.
Les frères de Joseph s'assirent en sa présence, le premier-né selon son droit d'aînesse, et le plus jeune selon son âge; et ils se regardaient les uns les autres avec étonnement.
Joseph leur fit porter des mets qui étaient devant lui, et Benjamin en eut cinq fois plus que les autres. Ils burent, et s'égayèrent avec lui.
Joseph donna cet ordre à l'intendant de sa maison: Remplis de vivres les sacs de ces gens, autant qu'ils en pourront porter, et mets l'argent de chacun à l'entrée de son sac.
Tu mettras aussi ma coupe, la coupe d'argent, à l'entrée du sac du plus jeune, avec l'argent de son blé. L'intendant fit ce que Joseph lui avait ordonné.
Le matin, dès qu'il fit jour, on renvoya ces gens avec leur ânes.
Ils étaient sortis de la ville, et ils n'en étaient guère éloignés, lorsque Joseph dit à son intendant: Lève-toi, poursuis ces gens; et, quand tu les auras atteints, tu leur diras: Pourquoi avez-vous rendu le mal pour le bien?
N'avez-vous pas la coupe dans laquelle boit mon seigneur, et dont il se sert pour deviner? Vous avez mal fait d'agir ainsi.
L'intendant les atteignit, et leur dit ces mêmes paroles.
Ils lui répondirent: Pourquoi mon seigneur parle-t-il de la sorte? Dieu préserve tes serviteurs d'avoir commis une telle action!
Voici, nous t'avons rapporté du pays de Canaan l'argent que nous avons trouvé à l'entrée de nos sacs; comment aurions-nous dérobé de l'argent ou de l'or dans la maison de ton seigneur?
Que celui de tes serviteurs sur qui se trouvera la coupe meure, et que nous soyons nous-mêmes esclaves de mon seigneur!
Il dit: Qu'il en soit donc selon vos paroles! Celui sur qui se trouvera la coupe sera mon esclave; et vous, vous serez innocents.
Aussitôt, chacun descendit son sac à terre, et chacun ouvrit son sac.
L'intendant les fouilla, commençant par le plus âgé et finissant par le plus jeune; et la coupe fut trouvée dans le sac de Benjamin.
Ils déchirèrent leurs vêtements, chacun rechargea son âne, et ils retournèrent à la ville.
Juda et ses frères arrivèrent à la maison de Joseph, où il était encore, et ils se prosternèrent en terre devant lui.
Joseph leur dit: Quelle action avez-vous faite? Ne savez-vous pas qu'un homme comme moi a le pouvoir de deviner?
Juda répondit: Que dirons-nous à mon seigneur? comment parlerons-nous? comment nous justifierons-nous? Dieu a trouvé l'iniquité de tes serviteurs. Nous voici esclaves de mon seigneur, nous, et celui sur qui s'est trouvée la coupe.
Et Joseph dit: Dieu me garde de faire cela! L'homme sur qui la coupe a été trouvée sera mon esclave; mais vous, remontez en paix vers votre père.
Alors Juda s'approcha de Joseph, et dit: De grâce, mon seigneur, que ton serviteur puisse faire entendre une parole à mon seigneur, et que sa colère ne s'enflamme point contre ton serviteur! car tu es comme Pharaon.
Mon seigneur a interrogé ses serviteurs, en disant: Avez-vous un père, ou un frère?
Nous avons répondu: Nous avons un vieux père, et un jeune frère, enfant de sa vieillesse; cet enfant avait un frère qui est mort, et qui était de la même mère; il reste seul, et son père l'aime.
Tu as dit à tes serviteurs: Faites-le descendre vers moi, et que je le voie de mes propres yeux.
Nous avons répondu à mon seigneur: L'enfant ne peut pas quitter son père; s'il le quitte, son père mourra.
Tu as dit à tes serviteurs: Si votre jeune frère ne descend pas avec vous, vous ne reverrez pas ma face.
Lorsque nous sommes remontés auprès de ton serviteur, mon père, nous lui avons rapporté les paroles de mon seigneur.
Notre père a dit: Retournez, achetez-nous un peu de vivres.
Nous avons répondu: Nous ne pouvons pas descendre; mais, si notre jeune frère est avec nous, nous descendrons, car nous ne pouvons pas voir la face de cet homme, à moins que notre jeune frère ne soit avec nous.
Ton serviteur, notre père, nous a dit: Vous savez que ma femme m'a enfanté deux fils.
L'un étant sorti de chez moi, je pense qu'il a été sans doute déchiré, car je ne l'ai pas revu jusqu'à présent.
Si vous me prenez encore celui-ci, et qu'il lui arrive un malheur, vous ferez descendre mes cheveux blancs avec douleur dans le séjour des morts.
Maintenant, si je retourne auprès de ton serviteur, mon père, sans avoir avec nous l'enfant à l'âme duquel son âme est attachée,
il mourra, en voyant que l'enfant n'y est pas; et tes serviteurs feront descendre avec douleur dans le séjour des morts les cheveux blancs de ton serviteur, notre père.
Car ton serviteur a répondu pour l'enfant, en disant à mon père: Si je ne le ramène pas auprès de toi, je serai pour toujours coupable envers mon père.
Permets donc, je te prie, à ton serviteur de rester à la place de l'enfant, comme esclave de mon seigneur; et que l'enfant remonte avec ses frères.
Comment pourrai-je remonter vers mon père, si l'enfant n'est pas avec moi? Ah! que je ne voie point l'affliction de mon père!
Joseph ne pouvait plus se contenir devant tous ceux qui l'entouraient. Il s'écria: Faites sortir tout le monde. Et il ne resta personne avec Joseph, quand il se fit connaître à ses frères.
Il éleva la voix, en pleurant. Les égyptiens l'entendirent, et la maison de Pharaon l'entendit.
Joseph dit à ses frères: Je suis Joseph! Mon père vit-il encore? Mais ses frères ne purent lui répondre, car ils étaient troublés en sa présence.
Joseph dit à ses frères: Approchez-vous de moi. Et ils s'approchèrent. Il dit: Je suis Joseph, votre frère, que vous avez vendu pour être mené en égypte.
Maintenant, ne vous affligez pas, et ne soyez pas fâchés de m'avoir vendu pour être conduit ici, car c'est pour vous sauver la vie que Dieu m'a envoyé devant vous.
Voilà deux ans que la famine est dans le pays; et pendant cinq années encore, il n'y aura ni labour, ni moisson.
Dieu m'a envoyé devant vous pour vous faire subsister dans le pays, et pour vous faire vivre par une grande délivrance.
Ce n'est donc pas vous qui m'avez envoyé ici, mais c'est Dieu; il m'a établi père de Pharaon, maître de toute sa maison, et gouverneur de tout le pays d'égypte.
Hâtez-vous de remonter auprès de mon père, et vous lui direz: Ainsi a parlé ton fils Joseph: Dieu m'a établi seigneur de toute l'égypte; descends vers moi, ne tarde pas!
Tu habiteras dans le pays de Gosen, et tu seras près de moi, toi, tes fils, et les fils de tes fils, tes brebis et tes boeufs, et tout ce qui est à toi.
Là, je te nourrirai, car il y aura encore cinq années de famine; et ainsi tu ne périras point, toi, ta maison, et tout ce qui est à toi.
Vous voyez de vos yeux, et mon frère Benjamin voit de ses yeux que c'est moi-même qui vous parle.
Racontez à mon père toute ma gloire en égypte, et tout ce que vous avez vu; et vous ferez descendre ici mon père au plus tôt.
Il se jeta au cou de Benjamin, son frère, et pleura; et Benjamin pleura sur son cou.
Il embrassa aussi tous ses frères, en pleurant. Après quoi, ses frères s'entretinrent avec lui.
Le bruit se répandit dans la maison de Pharaon que les frères de Joseph étaient arrivés: ce qui fut agréable à Pharaon et à ses serviteurs.
Pharaon dit à Joseph: Dis à tes frères: Faites ceci. Chargez vos bêtes, et partez pour le pays de Canaan;
prenez votre père et vos familles, et venez auprès de moi. Je vous donnerai ce qu'il y a de meilleur au pays d'égypte, et vous mangerez la graisse du pays.
Tu as ordre de leur dire: Faites ceci. Prenez dans le pays d'égypte des chars pour vos enfants et pour vos femmes; amenez votre père, et venez.
Ne regrettez point ce que vous laisserez, car ce qu'il a de meilleur dans tout le pays d'égypte sera pour vous.
Les fils d'Israël firent ainsi. Joseph leur donna des chars, selon l'ordre de Pharaon; il leur donna aussi des provisions pour la route.
Il leur donna à tous des vêtements de rechange, et il donna à Benjamin trois cents sicles d'argent et cinq vêtements de rechange.
Il envoya à son père dix ânes chargés de ce qu'il y avait de meilleur en égypte, et dix ânesses chargées de blé, de pain et de vivres, pour son père pendant le voyage.
Puis il congédia ses frères, qui partirent; et il leur dit: Ne vous querellez pas en chemin.
Ils remontèrent de l'égypte, et ils arrivèrent dans le pays de Canaan, auprès de Jacob, leur père.
Ils lui dirent: Joseph vit encore, et même c'est lui qui gouverne tout le pays d'égypte. Mais le coeur de Jacob resta froid, parce qu'il ne les croyait pas.
Ils lui rapportèrent toutes les paroles que Joseph leur avait dites. Il vit les chars que Joseph avait envoyés pour le transporter. C'est alors que l'esprit de Jacob, leur père, se ranima;
et Israël dit: C'est assez! Joseph, mon fils, vit encore! J'irai, et je le verrai avant que je meure.
Israël partit, avec tout ce qui lui appartenait. Il arriva à Beer Schéba, et il offrit des sacrifices au Dieu de son père Isaac.
Dieu parla à Israël dans une vision pendant la nuit, et il dit: Jacob! Jacob! Israël répondit: Me voici!
Et Dieu dit: Je suis le Dieu, le Dieu de ton père. Ne crains point de descendre en égypte, car là je te ferai devenir une grande nation.
Moi-même je descendrai avec toi en égypte, et moi-même je t'en ferai remonter; et Joseph te fermera les yeux.
Jacob quitta Beer Schéba; et les fils d'Israël mirent Jacob, leur père, avec leurs enfants et leurs femmes, sur les chars que Pharaon avait envoyés pour les transporter.
Ils prirent aussi leurs troupeaux et les biens qu'ils avaient acquis dans le pays de Canaan. Et Jacob se rendit en égypte, avec toute sa famille.
Il emmena avec lui en égypte ses fils et les fils de ses fils, ses filles et les filles de ses fils, et toute sa famille.
Voici les noms des fils d'Israël, qui vinrent en égypte. Jacob et ses fils. Premier-né de Jacob: Ruben.
Fils de Ruben: Hénoc, Pallu, Hetsron et Carmi.
Fils de Siméon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin et Tsochar; et Saul, fils de la Cananéenne.
Fils de Lévi: Guerschon, Kehath et Merari.
Fils de Juda: Er, Onan, Schéla, Pérets et Zarach; mais Er et Onan moururent au pays de Canaan. Les fils de Pérets furent Hetsron et Hamul.
Fils d'Issacar: Thola, Puva, Job et Schimron.
Fils de Zabulon: Séred, élon et Jahleel.
Ce sont là les fils que Léa enfanta à Jacob à Paddan Aram, avec sa fille Dina. Ses fils et ses filles formaient en tout trente-trois personnes.
Fils de Gad: Tsiphjon, Haggi, Schuni, Etsbon, éri, Arodi et Areéli.
Fils d'Aser: Jimna, Jischva, Jischvi et Beria; et Sérach, leur soeur. Et les fils de Beria: Héber et Malkiel.
Ce sont là les fils de Zilpa, que Laban avait donnée à Léa, sa fille; et elle les enfanta à Jacob. En tout, seize personnes.
Fils de Rachel, femme de Jacob: Joseph et Benjamin.
Il naquit à Joseph, au pays d'égypte, Manassé et éphraïm, que lui enfanta Asnath, fille de Poti Phéra, prêtre d'On.
Fils de Benjamin: Béla, Béker, Aschbel, Guéra, Naaman, éhi, Rosch, Muppim, Huppim et Ard.
Ce sont là les fils de Rachel, qui naquirent à Jacob. En tout, quatorze personnes.
Fils de Dan: Huschim.
Fils de Nephthali: Jathtseel, Guni, Jetser et Schillem.
Ce sont là les fils de Bilha, que Laban avait donnée à Rachel, sa fille; et elle les enfanta à Jacob. En tout, sept personnes.
Les personnes qui vinrent avec Jacob en égypte, et qui étaient issues de lui, étaient au nombre de soixante-six en tout, sans compter les femmes des fils de Jacob.
Et Joseph avait deux fils qui lui étaient nés en égypte. Le total des personnes de la famille de Jacob qui vinrent en égypte était de soixante-dix.
Jacob envoya Juda devant lui vers Joseph, pour l'informer qu'il se rendait en Gosen.
Joseph attela son char et y monta, pour aller en Gosen, à la rencontre d'Israël, son père. Dès qu'il le vit, il se jeta à son cou, et pleura longtemps sur son cou.
Israël dit à Joseph: Que je meure maintenant, puisque j'ai vu ton visage et que tu vis encore!
Joseph dit à ses frères et à la famille de son père: Je vais avertir Pharaon, et je lui dirai: Mes frères et la famille de mon père, qui étaient au pays de Canaan, sont arrivés auprès de moi.
Ces hommes sont bergers, car ils élèvent des troupeaux; ils ont amené leurs brebis et leurs boeufs, et tout ce qui leur appartient.
Et quand Pharaon vous appellera, et dira:
Quelle est votre occupation? vous répondrez: Tes serviteurs ont élevé des troupeaux, depuis notre jeunesse jusqu'à présent, nous et nos pères. De cette manière, vous habiterez dans le pays de Gosen, car tous les bergers sont en abomination aux égyptiens.
Joseph alla avertir Pharaon, et lui dit: Mes frères et mon père sont arrivés du pays de Canaan, avec leurs brebis et leurs boeufs, et tout ce qui leur appartient; et les voici dans le pays de Gosen.
Il prit cinq de ses frères, et les présenta à Pharaon.
Pharaon leur dit: Quelle est votre occupation? Ils répondirent à Pharaon: Tes serviteurs sont bergers, comme l'étaient nos pères.
Ils dirent encore à Pharaon: Nous sommes venus pour séjourner dans le pays, parce qu'il n'y a plus de pâturage pour les brebis de tes serviteurs, car la famine s'appesantit sur le pays de Canaan; permets donc à tes serviteurs d'habiter au pays de Gosen.
Pharaon dit à Joseph: Ton père et tes frères sont venus auprès de toi.
Le pays d'égypte est devant toi; établis ton père et tes frères dans la meilleure partie du pays. Qu'ils habitent dans le pays de Gosen; et, si tu trouves parmi eux des hommes capables, mets-les à la tête de mes troupeaux.
Joseph fit venir Jacob, son père, et le présenta à Pharaon. Et Jacob bénit Pharaon.
Pharaon dit à Jacob: Quel est le nombre de jours des années de ta vie?
Jacob répondit à Pharaon: Les jours des années de mon pèlerinage sont de cent trente ans. Les jours des années de ma vie ont été peu nombreux et mauvais, et ils n'ont point atteint les jours des années de la vie de mes pères durant leur pèlerinage.
Jacob bénit encore Pharaon, et se retira de devant Pharaon.
Joseph établit son père et ses frères, et leur donna une propriété dans le pays d'égypte, dans la meilleure partie du pays, dans la contrée de Ramsès, comme Pharaon l'avait ordonné.
Joseph fournit du pain à son père et à ses frères, et à toute la famille de son père, selon le nombre des enfants.
Il n'y avait plus de pain dans tout le pays, car la famine était très grande; le pays d'égypte et le pays de Canaan languissaient, à cause de la famine.
Joseph recueillit tout l'argent qui se trouvait dans le pays d'égypte et dans le pays de Canaan, contre le blé qu'on achetait; et il fit entrer cet argent dans la maison de Pharaon.
Quand l'argent du pays d'égypte et du pays de Canaan fut épuisé, tous les égyptiens vinrent à Joseph, en disant: Donne-nous du pain! Pourquoi mourrions-nous en ta présence? car l'argent manque.
Joseph dit: Donnez vos troupeaux, et je vous donnerai du pain contre vos troupeaux, si l'argent manque.
Ils amenèrent leurs troupeaux à Joseph, et Joseph leur donna du pain contre les chevaux, contre les troupeaux de brebis et de boeufs, et contre les ânes. Il leur fournit ainsi du pain cette année-là contre tous leurs troupeaux.
Lorsque cette année fut écoulée, ils vinrent à Joseph l'année suivante, et lui dirent: Nous ne cacherons point à mon seigneur que l'argent est épuisé, et que les troupeaux de bétail ont été amenés à mon seigneur; il ne reste devant mon seigneur que nos corps et nos terres.
Pourquoi mourrions-nous sous tes yeux, nous et nos terres? Achète-nous avec nos terres contre du pain, et nous appartiendrons à mon seigneur, nous et nos terres. Donne-nous de quoi semer, afin que nous vivions et que nous ne mourions pas, et que nos terres ne soient pas désolées.
Joseph acheta toutes les terres de l'égypte pour Pharaon; car les égyptiens vendirent chacun leur champ, parce que la famine les pressait. Et le pays devint la propriété de Pharaon.
Il fit passer le peuple dans les villes, d'un bout à l'autre des frontières de l'égypte.
Seulement, il n'acheta point les terres des prêtres, parce qu'il y avait une loi de Pharaon en faveur des prêtres, qui vivaient du revenu que leur assurait Pharaon: c'est pourquoi ils ne vendirent point leurs terres.
Joseph dit au peuple: Je vous ai achetés aujourd'hui avec vos terres, pour Pharaon; voici pour vous de la semence, et vous pourrez ensemencer le sol.
A la récolte, vous donnerez un cinquième à Pharaon, et vous aurez les quatre autres parties, pour ensemencer les champs, et pour vous nourrir avec vos enfants et ceux qui sont dans vos maisons.
Ils dirent: Tu nous sauves la vie! que nous trouvions grâce aux yeux de mon seigneur, et nous serons esclaves de Pharaon.
Joseph fit de cela une loi, qui a subsisté jusqu'à ce jour, et d'après laquelle un cinquième du revenu des terres de l'égypte appartient à Pharaon; il n'y a que les terres des prêtres qui ne soient point à Pharaon.
Israël habita dans le pays d'égypte, dans le pays de Gosen. Ils eurent des possessions, ils furent féconds et multiplièrent beaucoup.
Jacob vécut dix-sept ans dans le pays d'égypte; et les jours des années de la vie de Jacob furent de cent quarante-sept ans.
Lorsqu'Israël approcha du moment de sa mort, il appela son fils Joseph, et lui dit: Si j'ai trouvé grâce à tes yeux, mets, je te prie, ta main sous ma cuisse, et use envers moi de bonté et de fidélité: ne m'enterre pas en égypte!
Quand je serai couché avec mes pères, tu me transporteras hors de l'égypte, et tu m'enterreras dans leur sépulcre. Joseph répondit: Je ferai selon ta parole.
Jacob dit: Jure-le-moi. Et Joseph le lui jura. Puis Israël se prosterna sur le chevet de son lit.
Après ces choses, l'on vint dire à Joseph: Voici, ton père est malade. Et il prit avec lui ses deux fils, Manassé et éphraïm.
On avertit Jacob, et on lui dit: Voici ton fils Joseph qui vient vers toi. Et Israël rassembla ses forces, et s'assit sur son lit.
Jacob dit à Joseph: Le Dieu tout puissant m'est apparu à Luz, dans le pays de Canaan, et il m'a béni.
Il m'a dit: Je te rendrai fécond, je te multiplierai, et je ferai de toi une multitude de peuples; je donnerai ce pays à ta postérité après toi, pour qu'elle le possède à toujours.
Maintenant, les deux fils qui te sont nés au pays d'égypte, avant mon arrivée vers toi en égypte, seront à moi; éphraïm et Manassé seront à moi, comme Ruben et Siméon.
Mais les enfants que tu as engendrés après eux seront à toi; ils seront appelés du nom de leurs frères dans leur héritage.
A mon retour de Paddan, Rachel mourut en route auprès de moi, dans le pays de Canaan, à quelque distance d'éphrata; et c'est là que je l'ai enterrée, sur le chemin d'éphrata, qui est Bethléhem.
Israël regarda les fils de Joseph, et dit: Qui sont ceux-ci?
Joseph répondit à son père: Ce sont mes fils, que Dieu m'a donnés ici. Israël dit: Fais-les, je te prie, approcher de moi, pour que je les bénisse.
Les yeux d'Israël étaient appesantis par la vieillesse; il ne pouvait plus voir. Joseph les fit approcher de lui; et Israël leur donna un baiser, et les embrassa.
Israël dit à Joseph: Je ne pensais pas revoir ton visage, et voici que Dieu me fait voir même ta postérité.
Joseph les retira des genoux de son père, et il se prosterna en terre devant lui.
Puis Joseph les prit tous deux, éphraïm de sa main droite à la gauche d'Israël, et Manassé de sa main gauche à la droite d'Israël, et il les fit approcher de lui.
Israël étendit sa main droite et la posa sur la tête d'éphraïm qui était le plus jeune, et il posa sa main gauche sur la tête de Manassé: ce fut avec intention qu'il posa ses mains ainsi, car Manassé était le premier-né.
Il bénit Joseph, et dit: Que le Dieu en présence duquel ont marché mes pères, Abraham et Isaac, que le Dieu qui m'a conduit depuis que j'existe jusqu'à ce jour,
que l'ange qui m'a délivré de tout mal, bénisse ces enfants! Qu'ils soient appelés de mon nom et du nom de mes pères, Abraham et Isaac, et qu'ils multiplient en abondance au milieu du pays!
Joseph vit avec déplaisir que son père posait sa main droite sur la tête d'éphraïm; il saisit la main de son père, pour la détourner de dessus la tête d'éphraïm, et la diriger sur celle de Manassé.
Et Joseph dit à son père: Pas ainsi, mon père, car celui-ci est le premier-né; pose ta main droite sur sa tête.
Son père refusa, et dit: Je le sais, mon fils, je le sais; lui aussi deviendra un peuple, lui aussi sera grand; mais son frère cadet sera plus grand que lui, et sa postérité deviendra une multitude de nations.
Il les bénit ce jour-là, et dit: C'est par toi qu'Israël bénira, en disant: Que Dieu te traite comme éphraïm et comme Manassé! Et il mit éphraïm avant Manassé.
Israël dit à Joseph: Voici, je vais mourir! Mais Dieu sera avec vous, et il vous fera retourner dans le pays de vos pères.
Je te donne, de plus qu'à tes frères, une part que j'ai prise de la main des Amoréens avec mon épée et avec mon arc.
Jacob appela ses fils, et dit: Assemblez-vous, et je vous annoncerai ce qui vous arrivera dans la suite des temps.
Rassemblez-vous, et écoutez, fils de Jacob! écoutez Israël, votre père!
Ruben, toi, mon premier-né, Ma force et les prémices de ma vigueur, Supérieur en dignité et supérieur en puissance,
Impétueux comme les eaux, tu n'auras pas la prééminence! Car tu es monté sur la couche de ton père, Tu as souillé ma couche en y montant.
Siméon et Lévi sont frères; Leurs glaives sont des instruments de violence.
Que mon âme n'entre point dans leur conciliabule, Que mon esprit ne s'unisse point à leur assemblée! Car, dans leur colère, ils ont tué des hommes, Et, dans leur méchanceté, ils ont coupé les jarrets des taureaux.
Maudite soit leur colère, car elle est violente, Et leur fureur, car elle est cruelle! Je les séparerai dans Jacob, Et je les disperserai dans Israël.
Juda, tu recevras les hommages de tes frères; Ta main sera sur la nuque de tes ennemis. Les fils de ton père se prosterneront devant toi.
Juda est un jeune lion. Tu reviens du carnage, mon fils! Il ploie les genoux, il se couche comme un lion, Comme une lionne: qui le fera lever?
Le sceptre ne s'éloignera point de Juda, Ni le bâton souverain d'entre ses pieds, Jusqu'à ce que vienne le Schilo, Et que les peuples lui obéissent.
Il attache à la vigne son âne, Et au meilleur cep le petit de son ânesse; Il lave dans le vin son vêtement, Et dans le sang des raisins son manteau.
Il a les yeux rouges de vin, Et les dents blanches de lait.
Zabulon habitera sur la côte des mers, Il sera sur la côte des navires, Et sa limite s'étendra du côté de Sidon.
Issacar est un âne robuste, Qui se couche dans les étables.
Il voit que le lieu où il repose est agréable, Et que la contrée est magnifique; Et il courbe son épaule sous le fardeau, Il s'assujettit à un tribut.
Dan jugera son peuple, Comme l'une des tribus d'Israël.
Dan sera un serpent sur le chemin, Une vipère sur le sentier, Mordant les talons du cheval, Pour que le cavalier tombe à la renverse.
J'espère en ton secours, ô éternel!
Gad sera assailli par des bandes armées, Mais il les assaillira et les poursuivra.
Aser produit une nourriture excellente; Il fournira les mets délicats des rois.
Nephthali est une biche en liberté; Il profère de belles paroles.
Joseph est le rejeton d'un arbre fertile, Le rejeton d'un arbre fertile près d'une source; Les branches s'élèvent au-dessus de la muraille.
Ils l'ont provoqué, ils ont lancé des traits; Les archers l'ont poursuivi de leur haine.
Mais son arc est demeuré ferme, Et ses mains ont été fortifiées Par les mains du Puissant de Jacob: Il est ainsi devenu le berger, le rocher d'Israël.
C'est l'oeuvre du Dieu de ton père, qui t'aidera; C'est l'oeuvre du Tout puissant, qui te bénira Des bénédictions des cieux en haut, Des bénédictions des eaux en bas, Des bénédictions des mamelles et du sein maternel.
Les bénédictions de ton père s'élèvent Au-dessus des bénédictions de mes pères Jusqu'à la cime des collines éternelles: Qu'elles soient sur la tête de Joseph, Sur le sommet de la tête du prince de ses frères!
Benjamin est un loup qui déchire; Le matin, il dévore la proie, Et le soir, il partage le butin.
Ce sont là tous ceux qui forment les douze tribus d'Israël. Et c'est là ce que leur dit leur père, en les bénissant. Il les bénit, chacun selon sa bénédiction.
Puis il leur donna cet ordre: Je vais être recueilli auprès de mon peuple; enterrez-moi avec mes pères, dans la caverne qui est au champ d'éphron, le Héthien,
dans la caverne du champ de Macpéla, vis-à-vis de Mamré, dans le pays de Canaan. C'est le champ qu'Abraham a acheté d'éphron, le Héthien, comme propriété sépulcrale.
Là on a enterré Abraham et Sara, sa femme; là on a enterré Isaac et Rebecca, sa femme; et là j'ai enterré Léa.
Le champ et la caverne qui s'y trouve ont été achetés des fils de Heth.
Lorsque Jacob eut achevé de donner ses ordres à ses fils, il retira ses pieds dans le lit, il expira, et fut recueilli auprès de son peuple.
Joseph se jeta sur le visage de son père, pleura sur lui, et le baisa.
Il ordonna aux médecins à son service d'embaumer son père, et les médecins embaumèrent Israël.
Quarante jours s'écoulèrent ainsi, et furent employés à l'embaumer. Et les égyptiens le pleurèrent soixante-dix jours.
Quand les jours du deuil furent passés, Joseph s'adressa aux gens de la maison de Pharaon, et leur dit: Si j'ai trouvé grâce à vos yeux, rapportez, je vous prie, à Pharaon ce que je vous dis.
Mon père m'a fait jurer, en disant: Voici, je vais mourir! Tu m'enterreras dans le sépulcre que je me suis acheté au pays de Canaan. Je voudrais donc y monter, pour enterrer mon père; et je reviendrai.
Pharaon répondit: Monte, et enterre ton père, comme il te l'a fait jurer.
Joseph monta, pour enterrer son père. Avec lui montèrent tous les serviteurs de Pharaon, anciens de sa maison, tous les anciens du pays d'égypte,
toute la maison de Joseph, ses frères, et la maison de son père: on ne laissa dans le pays de Gosen que les enfants, les brebis et les boeufs.
Il y avait encore avec Joseph des chars et des cavaliers, en sorte que le cortège était très nombreux.
Arrivés à l'aire d'Athad, qui est au delà du Jourdain, ils firent entendre de grandes et profondes lamentations; et Joseph fit en l'honneur de son père un deuil de sept jours.
Les habitants du pays, les Cananéens, furent témoins de ce deuil dans l'aire d'Athad, et ils dirent: Voilà un grand deuil parmi les égyptiens! C'est pourquoi l'on a donné le nom d'Abel Mitsraïm à cette aire qui est au delà du Jourdain.
C'est ainsi que les fils de Jacob exécutèrent les ordres de leur père.
Ils le transportèrent au pays de Canaan, et l'enterrèrent dans la caverne du champ de Macpéla, qu'Abraham avait achetée d'éphron, le Héthien, comme propriété sépulcrale, et qui est vis-à-vis de Mamré.
Joseph, après avoir enterré son père, retourna en égypte, avec ses frères et tous ceux qui étaient montés avec lui pour enterrer son père.
Quand les frères de Joseph virent que leur père était mort, ils dirent: Si Joseph nous prenait en haine, et nous rendait tout le mal que nous lui avons fait!
Et ils firent dire à Joseph: Ton père a donné cet ordre avant de mourir:
Vous parlerez ainsi à Joseph: Oh! pardonne le crime de tes frères et leur péché, car ils t'ont fait du mal! Pardonne maintenant le péché des serviteurs du Dieu de ton père! Joseph pleura, en entendant ces paroles.
Ses frères vinrent eux-mêmes se prosterner devant lui, et ils dirent: Nous sommes tes serviteurs.
Joseph leur dit: Soyez sans crainte; car suis-je à la place de Dieu?
Vous aviez médité de me faire du mal: Dieu l'a changé en bien, pour accomplir ce qui arrive aujourd'hui, pour sauver la vie à un peuple nombreux.
Soyez donc sans crainte; je vous entretiendrai, vous et vos enfants. Et il les consola, en parlant à leur coeur.
Joseph demeura en égypte, lui et la maison de son père. Il vécut cent dix ans.
Joseph vit les fils d'éphraïm jusqu'à la troisième génération; et les fils de Makir, fils de Manassé, naquirent sur ses genoux.
Joseph dit à ses frères: Je vais mourir! Mais Dieu vous visitera, et il vous fera remonter de ce pays-ci dans le pays qu'il a juré de donner à Abraham, à Isaac et à Jacob.
Joseph fit jurer les fils d'Israël, en disant: Dieu vous visitera; et vous ferez remonter mes os loin d'ici.
Joseph mourut, âgé de cent dix ans. On l'embauma, et on le mit dans un cercueil en égypte.
Am Anfang schuf Gott Himmel und Erde.
Und die Erde war wüst und leer, und es war finster auf der Tiefe; und der Geist Gottes schwebte auf dem Wasser.
Und Gott sprach: Es werde Licht! Und es ward Licht.
Und Gott sah, da&szlig; das Licht gut war. Da schied Gott das Licht von der Finsternis
und nannte das Licht Tag und die Finsternis Nacht. Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der erste Tag.
Und Gott sprach: Es werde eine Feste zwischen den Wassern, die da scheide zwischen den Wassern.
Da machte Gott die Feste und schied das Wasser unter der Feste von dem Wasser über der Feste. Und es geschah so.
Und Gott nannte die Feste Himmel. Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der zweite Tag.
Und Gott sprach: Es sammle sich das Wasser unter dem Himmel an besondere Orte, da&szlig; man das Trockene sehe. Und es geschah so.
Und Gott nannte das Trockene Erde, und die Sammlung der Wasser nannte er Meer. Und Gott sah, da&szlig; es gut war.
Und Gott sprach: Es lasse die Erde aufgehen Gras und Kraut, das Samen bringe, und fruchtbare Bäume auf Erden, die ein jeder nach seiner Art Früchte tragen, in denen ihr Same ist. Und es geschah so.
Und die Erde lie&szlig; aufgehen Gras und Kraut, das Samen bringt, ein jedes nach seiner Art, und Bäume, die da Früchte tragen, in denen ihr Same ist, ein jeder nach seiner Art. Und Gott sah, da&szlig; es gut war.
Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der dritte Tag.
Und Gott sprach: Es werden Lichter an der Feste des Himmels, die da scheiden Tag und Nacht und geben Zeichen, Zeiten, Tage und Jahre
und seien Lichter an der Feste des Himmels, da&szlig; sie scheinen auf die Erde. Und es geschah so.
Und Gott machte zwei gro&szlig;e Lichter: ein gro&szlig;es Licht, das den Tag regiere, und ein kleines Licht, das die Nacht regiere, dazu auch die Sterne.
Und Gott setzte sie an die Feste des Himmels, da&szlig; sie schienen auf die Erde
und den Tag und die Nacht regierten und schieden Licht und Finsternis. Und Gott sah, da&szlig; es gut war.
Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der vierte Tag.
Und Gott sprach: Es wimmle das Wasser von lebendigem Getier, und Vögel sollen fliegen auf Erden unter der Feste des Himmels.
Und Gott schuf gro&szlig;e Walfische und alles Getier, das da lebt und webt, davon das Wasser wimmelt, ein jedes nach seiner Art, und alle gefiederten Vögel, einen jeden nach seiner Art. Und Gott sah, da&szlig; es gut war.
Und Gott segnete sie und sprach: Seid fruchtbar und mehret euch und erfüllet das Wasser im Meer, und die Vögel sollen sich mehren auf Erden.
Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der fünfte Tag.
Und Gott sprach: Die Erde bringe hervor lebendiges Getier, ein jedes nach seiner Art: Vieh, Gewürm und Tiere des Feldes, ein jedes nach seiner Art. Und es geschah so.
Und Gott machte die Tiere des Feldes, ein jedes nach seiner Art, und das Vieh nach seiner Art und alles Gewürm des Erdbodens nach seiner Art. Und Gott sah, da&szlig; es gut war.
Und Gott sprach: Lasset uns Menschen machen, ein Bild, das uns gleich sei, die da herrschen über die Fische im Meer und über die Vögel unter dem Himmel und über das Vieh und über alle Tiere des Feldes und über alles Gewürm, das auf Erden kriecht.
Und Gott schuf den Menschen zu seinem Bilde, zum Bilde Gottes schuf er ihn; und schuf sie als Mann und Weib.
Und Gott segnete sie und sprach zu ihnen: Seid fruchtbar und mehret euch und füllet die Erde und machet sie euch untertan und herrschet über die Fische im Meer und über die Vögel unter dem Himmel und über das Vieh und über alles Getier, das auf Erden kriecht.
Und Gott sprach: Sehet da, ich habe euch gegeben alle Pflanzen, die Samen bringen, auf der ganzen Erde, und alle Bäume mit Früchten, die Samen bringen, zu eurer Speise.
Aber allen Tieren auf Erden und allen Vögeln unter dem Himmel und allem Gewürm, das auf Erden lebt, habe ich alles grüne Kraut zur Nahrung gegeben. Und es geschah so.
Und Gott sah an alles, was er gemacht hatte, und siehe, es war sehr gut. Da ward aus Abend und Morgen der sechste Tag. 
</P><hr><h3>2. Kapitel</h3>
<p>So wurden vollendet Himmel und Erde mit ihrem ganzen Heer.
Und so vollendete Gott am siebenten Tage seine Werke, die er machte, und ruhte am siebenten Tage von allen seinen Werken, die er gemacht hatte.
Und Gott segnete den siebenten Tag und heiligte ihn, weil er an ihm ruhte von allen seinen Werken, die Gott geschaffen und gemacht hatte.
So sind Himmel und Erde geworden, als sie geschaffen wurden. Es war zu der Zeit, da Gott der HERR Erde und Himmel machte.
Und alle die Sträucher auf dem Felde waren noch nicht auf Erden, und all das Kraut auf dem Felde war noch nicht gewachsen; denn Gott der HERR hatte noch nicht regnen lassen auf Erden, und kein Mensch war da, der das Land bebaute;
aber ein Nebel stieg auf von der Erde und feuchtete alles Land.
Da machte Gott der HERR den Menschen aus Erde vom Acker und blies ihm den Odem des Lebens in seine Nase. Und so ward der Mensch ein lebendiges Wesen.
Und Gott der HERR pflanzte einen Garten in Eden gegen Osten hin und setzte den Menschen hinein, den er gemacht hatte.
Und Gott der HERR lie&szlig; aufwachsen aus der Erde allerlei Bäume, verlockend anzusehen und gut zu essen, und den Baum des Lebens mitten im Garten und den Baum der Erkenntnis des Guten und Bösen.
Und es ging aus von Eden ein Strom, den Garten zu bewässern, und teilte sich von da in vier Hauptarme.
Der erste hei&szlig;t Pischon, der flie&szlig;t um das ganze Land Hawila, und dort findet man Gold;
und das Gold des Landes ist kostbar. Auch findet man da Bedolachharz und den Edelstein Schoham.
Der zweite Strom hei&szlig;t Gihon, der flie&szlig;t um das ganze Land Kusch.
Der dritte Strom hei&szlig;t Tigris, der flie&szlig;t östlich von Assyrien. Der vierte Strom ist der Euphrat.
Und Gott der HERR nahm den Menschen und setzte ihn in den Garten Eden, da&szlig; er ihn bebaute und bewahrte.
Und Gott der HERR gebot dem Menschen und sprach: Du darfst essen von allen Bäumen im Garten,
aber von dem Baum der Erkenntnis des Guten und Bösen sollst du nicht essen; denn an dem Tage, da du von ihm issest, mu&szlig;t du des Todes sterben.
Und Gott der HERR sprach: Es ist nicht gut, da&szlig; der Mensch allein sei; ich will ihm eine Gehilfin machen, die um ihn sei.*
Und Gott der HERR machte aus Erde alle die Tiere auf dem Felde und alle die Vögel unter dem Himmel und brachte sie zu dem Menschen, da&szlig; er sähe, wie er sie nennte; denn wie der Mensch jedes Tier nennen würde, so sollte es hei&szlig;en.
Und der Mensch gab einem jeden Vieh und Vogel unter dem Himmel und Tier auf dem Felde seinen Namen; aber für den Menschen ward keine Gehilfin gefunden, die um ihn wäre.
Da lie&szlig; Gott der HERR einen tiefen Schlaf fallen auf den Menschen, und er schlief ein. Und er nahm eine seiner Rippen und schlo&szlig; die Stelle mit Fleisch.
Und Gott der HERR baute ein Weib aus der Rippe, die er von dem Menschen nahm, und brachte sie zu ihm.
Da sprach der Mensch: Das ist doch Bein von meinem Bein und Fleisch von meinem Fleisch; man wird sie Männin nennen, weil sie vom Manne genommen ist.* *Luther versucht mit "Männin" und "Mann" ein hebräisches Wortspiel wiederzugeben.
Darum wird ein Mann seinen Vater und seine Mutter verlassen und seinem Weibe anhangen, und sie werden sein ein Fleisch.
Und sie waren beide nackt, der Mensch und sein Weib, und schämten sich nicht. 
</P><hr><h3>3. Kapitel</h3><h3>Der Sündenfall</h3>
<p>Aber die Schlange war listiger als alle Tiere auf dem Felde, die Gott der HERR gemacht hatte, und sprach zu dem Weibe: Ja, sollte Gott gesagt haben: ihr sollt nicht essen von allen Bäumen im Garten?
Da sprach das Weib zu der Schlange: Wir essen von den Früchten der Bäume im Garten;
aber von den Früchten des Baumes mitten im Garten hat Gott gesagt: Esset nicht davon, rühret sie auch nicht an, da&szlig; ihr nicht sterbet!
Da sprach die Schlange zum Weibe: Ihr werdet keineswegs des Todes sterben,
sondern Gott wei&szlig;: an dem Tage, da ihr davon esset, werden eure Augen aufgetan, und ihr werdet sein wie Gott und wissen, was gut und böse ist.
Und das Weib sah, da&szlig; von dem Baum gut zu essen wäre und da&szlig; er eine Lust für die Augen wäre und verlockend, weil er klug machte. Und sie nahm von der Frucht und a&szlig; und gab ihrem Mann, der bei ihr war, auch davon, und er a&szlig;.
Da wurden ihnen beiden die Augen aufgetan, und sie wurden gewahr, da&szlig; sie nackt waren, und flochten Feigenblätter zusammen und machten sich Schurze.
Und sie hörten Gott den HERRN, wie er im Garten ging, als der Tag kühl geworden war. Und Adam versteckte sich mit seinem Weibe vor dem Angesicht Gottes des HERRN unter den Bäumen im Garten.
Und Gott der HERR rief Adam und sprach zu ihm: Wo bist du?
Und er sprach: Ich hörte dich im Garten und fürchtete mich; denn ich bin nackt, darum versteckte ich mich.
Und er sprach: Wer hat dir gesagt, da&szlig; du nackt bist? Hast du nicht gegessen von dem Baum, von dem ich dir gebot, du solltest nicht davon essen?
Da sprach Adam: Das Weib, das du mir zugesellt hast, gab mir von dem Baum, und ich a&szlig;.
Da sprach Gott der HERR zum Weibe: Warum hast du das getan? Das Weib sprach: Die Schlange betrog mich, so da&szlig; ich a&szlig;.
Da sprach Gott der HERR zu der Schlange: Weil du das getan hast, seist du verflucht, versto&szlig;en aus allem Vieh und allen Tieren auf dem Felde. Auf deinem Bauche sollst du kriechen und Erde fressen dein Leben lang.
Und ich will Feindschaft setzen zwischen dir und dem Weibe und zwischen deinem Nachkommen und ihrem Nachkommen; der soll dir den Kopf zertreten, und du wirst ihn in die Ferse stechen.
Und zum Weibe sprach er: Ich will dir viel Mühsal schaffen, wenn du schwanger wirst; unter Mühen sollst du Kinder gebären. Und dein Verlangen soll nach deinem Manne sein, aber er soll dein Herr sein.
Und zum Manne sprach er: Weil du gehorcht hast der Stimme deines Weibes und gegessen von dem Baum, von dem ich dir gebot und sprach: Du sollst nicht davon essen -, verflucht sei der Acker um deinetwillen! Mit Mühsal sollst du dich von ihm nähren dein Leben lang.
Dornen und Disteln soll er dir tragen, und du sollst das Kraut auf dem Felde essen.
Im Schwei&szlig;e deines Angesichts sollst du dein Brot essen, bis du wieder zu Erde werdest, davon du genommen bist. Denn du bist Erde und sollst zu Erde werden.
Und Adam nannte sein Weib Eva; denn sie wurde die Mutter aller, die da leben.
Und Gott der HERR machte Adam und seinem Weibe Röcke von Fellen und zog sie ihnen an.
Und Gott der HERR sprach: Siehe, der Mensch ist geworden wie unsereiner und wei&szlig;, was gut und böse ist. Nun aber, da&szlig; er nur nicht ausstrecke seine Hand und breche auch von dem Baum des Lebens und esse und lebe ewiglich!
Da wies ihn Gott der HERR aus dem Garten Eden, da&szlig; er die Erde bebaute, von der er genommen war.
Und er trieb den Menschen hinaus und lie&szlig; lagern vor dem Garten Eden die Cherubim mit dem flammenden, blitzenden Schwert, zu bewachen den Weg zu dem Baum des Lebens. 
</P><hr><h3>4. Kapitel</h3><h3>Kains Brudermord</h3>
<p>Und Adam erkannte sein Weib Eva, und sie ward schwanger und gebar den Kain und sprach: Ich habe einen Mann gewonnen mit Hilfe des HERRN.
Danach gebar sie Abel, seinen Bruder. Und Abel wurde ein Schäfer, Kain aber wurde ein Ackermann.
Es begab sich aber nach etlicher Zeit, da&szlig; Kain dem HERRN Opfer brachte von den Früchten des Feldes.
Und auch Abel brachte von den Erstlingen seiner Herde und von ihrem Fett. Und der HERR sah gnädig an Abel und sein Opfer,
aber Kain und sein Opfer sah er nicht gnädig an. Da ergrimmte Kain sehr und senkte finster seinen Blick.
Da sprach der HERR zu Kain: Warum ergrimmst du? Und warum senkst du deinen Blick?
Ist's nicht also? Wenn du fromm bist, so kannst du frei den Blick erheben. Bist du aber nicht fromm, so lauert die Sünde vor der Tür, und nach dir hat sie Verlangen; du aber herrsche über sie.
Da sprach Kain zu seinem Bruder Abel: La&szlig; uns aufs Feld gehen! Und es begab sich, als sie auf dem Felde waren, erhob sich Kain wider seinen Bruder Abel und schlug ihn tot.
Da sprach der HERR zu Kain: Wo ist dein Bruder Abel? Er sprach: Ich wei&szlig; nicht; soll ich meines Bruders Hüter sein?
Er aber sprach: Was hast du getan? Die Stimme des Blutes deines Bruders schreit zu mir von der Erde.
Und nun: Verflucht seist du auf der Erde, die ihr Maul hat aufgetan und deines Bruders Blut von deinen Händen empfangen.
Wenn du den Acker bebauen wirst, soll er dir hinfort seinen Ertrag nicht geben. Unstet und flüchtig sollst du sein auf Erden.
Kain aber sprach zu dem HERRN: Meine Strafe ist zu schwer, als da&szlig; ich sie tragen könnte.* *Luther übersetzte: "Meine Sünde ist grö&szlig;er, denn da&szlig; sie mir vergeben werden möge."
Siehe, du treibst mich heute vom Acker, und ich mu&szlig; mich vor deinem Angesicht verbergen und mu&szlig; unstet und flüchtig sein auf Erden. So wird mir's gehen, da&szlig; mich totschlägt, wer mich findet.
Aber der HERR sprach zu ihm: Nein, sondern wer Kain totschlägt, das soll siebenfältig gerächt werden. Und der HERR machte ein Zeichen an Kain, da&szlig; ihn niemand erschlüge, der ihn fände.
So ging Kain hinweg von dem Angesicht des HERRN und wohnte im Lande Nod, jenseits von Eden, gegen Osten. 
Und Kain erkannte sein Weib; die ward schwanger und gebar den Henoch. Und er baute eine Stadt, die nannte er nach seines Sohnes Namen Henoch.
Henoch aber zeugte Irad, Irad zeugte Mehujaël, Mehujaël zeugte Metuschaël, Metuschaël zeugte Lamech.
Lamech aber nahm zwei Frauen, eine hie&szlig; Ada, die andere Zilla.
Und Ada gebar Jabal; von dem sind hergekommen, die in Zelten wohnen und Vieh halten.
Und sein Bruder hie&szlig; Jubal; von dem sind hergekommen alle Zither- und Flötenspieler.
Zilla aber gebar auch, nämlich den Tubal-Kain; von dem sind hergekommen alle Erz- und Eisenschmiede. Und die Schwester des Tubal-Kain war Naama.
Und Lamech sprach zu seinen Frauen: Ada und Zilla, höret meine Rede, ihr Weiber Lamechs, merkt auf, was ich sage: Einen Mann erschlug ich für meine Wunde und einen Jüngling für meine Beule.
Kain soll siebenmal gerächt werden, aber Lamech siebenundsiebzigmal. 
Adam erkannte abermals sein Weib, und sie gebar einen Sohn, den nannte sie Set; denn Gott hat mir, sprach sie, einen andern Sohn gegeben für Abel, den Kain erschlagen hat.
Und Set zeugte auch einen Sohn und nannte ihn Enosch. Zu der Zeit fing man an, den Namen des HERRN anzurufen. 
</P><hr><h3>5. Kapitel</h3>
<p>Dies ist das Buch von Adams Geschlecht. Als Gott den Menschen schuf, machte er ihn nach dem Bilde Gottes
und schuf sie als Mann und Weib und segnete sie und gab ihnen den Namen "Mensch"* zur Zeit, da sie geschaffen wurden. *Mensch hei&szlig;t auf Hebräisch Adam und wird teils als Eigenname, teils als Gattungsname gebraucht.
Und Adam war 130 Jahre alt und zeugte einen Sohn, ihm gleich und nach seinem Bilde, und nannte ihn Set;
und lebte danach 800 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 930 Jahre, und starb.
Set war 105 Jahre alt und zeugte Enosch
und lebte danach 807 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 912 Jahre, und starb.
Enosch war 90 Jahre alt und zeugte Kenan
und lebte danach 815 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 905 Jahre, und starb.
Kenan war 70 Jahre alt und zeugte Mahalalel
und lebte danach 840 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 910 Jahre, und starb.
Mahalalel war 65 Jahre alt und zeugte Jered
und lebte danach 830 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 895 Jahre, und starb.
Jered war 162 Jahre alt und zeugte Henoch
und lebte danach 800 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 962 Jahre, und starb.
Henoch war 65 Jahre alt und zeugte Metuschelach.
Und Henoch wandelte mit Gott. Und nachdem er Metuschelach gezeugt hatte, lebte er 300 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 365 Jahre.
Und weil er mit Gott wandelte, nahm ihn Gott hinweg, und er ward nicht mehr gesehen.
Metuschelach war 187 Jahre alt und zeugte Lamech
und lebte danach 782 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 969 Jahre, und starb.
Lamech war 182 Jahre alt und zeugte einen Sohn
und nannte ihn Noah und sprach: Der wird uns trösten in unserer Mühe und Arbeit auf dem Acker, den der HERR verflucht hat.
Danach lebte er 595 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward 777 Jahre, und starb.
Noah war 500 Jahre alt und zeugte Sem, Ham und Jafet. 
</P><hr><h3>6. Kapitel</h3><h3>Gottessöhne und Menschentöchter</h3>
<p>Als aber die Menschen sich zu mehren begannen auf Erden und ihnen Töchter geboren wurden,
da sahen die Gottessöhne*, wie schön die Töchter der Menschen waren, und nahmen sich zu Frauen, welche sie wollten.
Da sprach der HERR: Mein Geist soll nicht immerdar im Menschen walten, denn auch der Mensch ist Fleisch. Ich will ihm als Lebenszeit geben hundertundzwanzig Jahre.
Zu der Zeit und auch später noch, als die Gottessöhne zu den Töchtern der Menschen eingingen und sie ihnen Kinder gebaren, wurden daraus die Riesen auf Erden. Das sind die Helden der Vorzeit, die hochberühmten. 
Als aber der HERR sah, da&szlig; der Menschen Bosheit gro&szlig; war auf Erden und alles Dichten und Trachten ihres Herzens nur böse war immerdar,
da reute es ihn, da&szlig; er die Menschen gemacht hatte auf Erden, und es bekümmerte ihn in seinem Herzen,
und er sprach: Ich will die Menschen, die ich geschaffen habe, vertilgen von der Erde, vom Menschen an bis hin zum Vieh und bis zum Gewürm und bis zu den Vögeln unter dem Himmel; denn es reut mich, da&szlig; ich sie gemacht habe.
Aber Noah fand Gnade vor dem HERRN.
Dies ist die Geschichte von Noahs Geschlecht. Noah war ein frommer Mann und ohne Tadel zu seinen Zeiten; er wandelte mit Gott.
Und er zeugte drei Söhne: Sem, Ham und Jafet.
Aber die Erde war verderbt vor Gottes Augen und voller Frevel.
Da sah Gott auf die Erde, und siehe, sie war verderbt; denn alles Fleisch hatte seinen Weg verderbt auf Erden.
Da sprach Gott zu Noah: Das Ende alles Fleisches ist bei mir beschlossen, denn die Erde ist voller Frevel von ihnen; und siehe, ich will sie verderben mit der Erde.
Mache dir einen Kasten von Tannenholz und mache Kammern darin und verpiche ihn mit Pech innen und au&szlig;en.
Und mache ihn so: Dreihundert Ellen sei die Länge, fünfzig Ellen die Breite und drei&szlig;ig Ellen die Höhe.
Ein Fenster sollst du daran machen obenan, eine Elle gro&szlig;. Die Tür sollst du mitten in seine Seite setzen. Und er soll drei Stockwerke haben, eines unten, das zweite in der Mitte, das dritte oben.
Denn siehe, ich will eine Sintflut kommen lassen auf Erden, zu verderben alles Fleisch, darin Odem des Lebens ist, unter dem Himmel. Alles, was auf Erden ist, soll untergehen.
Aber mit dir will ich meinen Bund aufrichten, und du sollst in die Arche gehen mit deinen Söhnen, mit deiner Frau und mit den Frauen deiner Söhne.
Und du sollst in die Arche bringen von allen Tieren, von allem Fleisch, je ein Paar, Männchen und Weibchen, da&szlig; sie leben bleiben mit dir.
Von den Vögeln nach ihrer Art, von dem Vieh nach seiner Art und von allem Gewürm auf Erden nach seiner Art: von den allen soll je ein Paar zu dir hineingehen, da&szlig; sie leben bleiben.
Und du sollst dir von jeder Speise nehmen, die gegessen wird, und sollst sie bei dir sammeln, da&szlig; sie dir und ihnen zur Nahrung diene.
Und Noah tat alles, was ihm Gott gebot. 
</P><hr><h3>7. Kapitel</h3><h3>Die Sintflut</h3>
<p>Und der HERR sprach zu Noah: Geh in die Arche, du und dein ganzes Haus; denn dich habe ich gerecht erfunden vor mir zu dieser Zeit.
Von allen reinen Tieren nimm zu dir je sieben, das Männchen und sein Weibchen, von den unreinen Tieren aber je ein Paar, das Männchen und sein Weibchen.
Desgleichen von den Vögeln unter dem Himmel je sieben, das Männchen und sein Weibchen, um das Leben zu erhalten auf dem ganzen Erdboden.
Denn von heute an in sieben Tagen will ich regnen lassen auf Erden vierzig Tage und vierzig Nächte und vertilgen von dem Erdboden alles Lebendige, das ich gemacht habe.
Und Noah tat alles, was ihm der HERR gebot.
Er war aber sechshundert Jahre alt, als die Sintflut auf Erden kam.
Und er ging in die Arche mit seinen Söhnen, seiner Frau und den Frauen seiner Söhne vor den Wassern der Sintflut.
Von den reinen Tieren und von den unreinen, von den Vögeln und von allem Gewürm auf Erden
gingen sie zu ihm in die Arche paarweise, je ein Männchen und Weibchen, wie ihm Gott geboten hatte.
Und als die sieben Tage vergangen waren, kamen die Wasser der Sintflut auf Erden.
In dem sechshundertsten Lebensjahr Noahs am siebzehnten Tag des zweiten Monats, an diesem Tag brachen alle Brunnen der gro&szlig;en Tiefe auf und taten sich die Fenster des Himmels auf
und ein Regen kam auf Erden vierzig Tage und vierzig Nächte.
An eben diesem Tage ging Noah in die Arche mit Sem, Ham und Jafet, seinen Söhnen, und mit seiner Frau und den drei Frauen seiner Söhne;
dazu alles wilde Getier nach seiner Art, alles Vieh nach seiner Art, alles Gewürm, das auf Erden kriecht, nach seiner Art und alle Vögel nach ihrer Art, alles, was fliegen konnte, alles, was Fittiche hatte;
das ging alles zu Noah in die Arche paarweise, von allem Fleisch, darin Odem des Lebens war.
Und das waren Männchen und Weibchen von allem Fleisch, und sie gingen hinein, wie denn Gott ihm geboten hatte. Und der HERR schlo&szlig; hinter ihm zu.
Und die Sintflut war vierzig Tage auf Erden, und die Wasser wuchsen und hoben die Arche auf und trugen sie empor über die Erde.
Und die Wasser nahmen überhand und wuchsen sehr auf Erden, und die Arche fuhr auf den Wassern.
Und die Wasser nahmen überhand und wuchsen so sehr auf Erden, da&szlig; alle hohen Berge unter dem ganzen Himmel bedeckt wurden.
Fünfzehn Ellen hoch gingen die Wasser über die Berge, so da&szlig; sie ganz bedeckt wurden.
Da ging alles Fleisch unter, das sich auf Erden regte, an Vögeln, an Vieh, an wildem Getier und an allem, was da wimmelte auf Erden, und alle Menschen.
Alles, was Odem des Lebens hatte auf dem Trockenen, das starb.
So wurde vertilgt alles, was auf dem Erdboden war, vom Menschen an bis hin zum Vieh und zum Gewürm und zu den Vögeln unter dem Himmel; das wurde alles von der Erde vertilgt. Allein Noah blieb übrig und was mit ihm in der Arche war.
Und die Wasser wuchsen gewaltig auf Erden hundertundfünfzig Tage. 
</P><hr><h3>8. Kapitel</h3><h3>Ende der Sintflut. Noahs Opfer. Verhei&szlig;ung des HERRN</h3>
<p>Da gedachte Gott an Noah und an alles wilde Getier und an alles Vieh, das mit ihm in der Arche war, und lie&szlig; Wind auf Erden kommen, und die Wasser fielen.
Und die Brunnen der Tiefe wurden verstopft samt den Fenstern des Himmels, und dem Regen vom Himmel wurde gewehrt.
Da verliefen sich die Wasser von der Erde und nahmen ab nach hundertundfünfzig Tagen.
Am siebzehnten Tag des siebenten Monats lie&szlig; sich die Arche nieder auf das Gebirge Ararat.
Es nahmen aber die Wasser immer mehr ab bis auf den zehnten Monat. Am ersten Tage des zehnten Monats sahen die Spitzen der Berge hervor.
Nach vierzig Tagen tat Noah an der Arche das Fenster auf, das er gemacht hatte,
und lie&szlig; einen Raben ausfliegen; der flog immer hin und her, bis die Wasser vertrockneten auf Erden.
Danach lie&szlig; er eine Taube ausfliegen, um zu erfahren, ob die Wasser sich verlaufen hätten auf Erden.
Da aber die Taube nichts fand, wo ihr Fu&szlig; ruhen konnte, kam sie wieder zu ihm in die Arche; denn noch war Wasser auf dem ganzen Erdboden. Da tat er die Hand heraus und nahm sie zu sich in die Arche.
Da harrte er noch weitere sieben Tage und lie&szlig; abermals eine Taube fliegen aus der Arche.
Die kam zu ihm um die Abendzeit, und siehe, ein Ölblatt hatte sie abgebrochen und trug's in ihrem Schnabel. Da merkte Noah, da&szlig; die Wasser sich verlaufen hätten auf Erden.
Aber er harrte noch weitere sieben Tage und lie&szlig; eine Taube ausfliegen; die kam nicht wieder zu ihm.
Im sechshundertundersten Lebensjahr Noahs am ersten Tage des ersten Monats waren die Wasser vertrocknet auf Erden. Da tat Noah das Dach von der Arche und sah, da&szlig; der Erdboden trocken war.
Und am siebenundzwanzigsten Tage des zweiten Monats war die Erde ganz trocken.
Da redete Gott mit Noah und sprach:
Geh aus der Arche, du und deine Frau, deine Söhne und die Frauen deiner Söhne mit dir.
Alles Getier, das bei dir ist, von allem Fleisch, an Vögeln, an Vieh und allem Gewürm, das auf Erden kriecht, das gehe heraus mit dir, da&szlig; sie sich regen auf Erden und fruchtbar seien und sich mehren auf Erden.
So ging Noah heraus mit seinen Söhnen und mit seiner Frau und den Frauen seiner Söhne,
dazu alle wilden Tiere, alles Vieh, alle Vögel und alles Gewürm, das auf Erden kriecht; das ging aus der Arche, ein jedes mit seinesgleichen.
Noah aber baute dem HERRN einen Altar und nahm von allem reinen Vieh und von allen reinen Vögeln und opferte Brandopfer auf dem Altar.
Und der HERR roch den lieblichen Geruch und sprach in seinem Herzen: Ich will hinfort nicht mehr die Erde verfluchen um der Menschen willen; denn das Dichten und Trachten des menschlichen Herzens ist böse von Jugend auf. Und ich will hinfort nicht mehr schlagen alles, was da lebt, wie ich getan habe.
Solange die Erde steht, soll nicht aufhören Saat und Ernte, Frost und Hitze, Sommer und Winter, Tag und Nacht. 
</P><hr><h3>9. Kapitel</h3><h3>Gottes Bund mit Noah</h3>
<p>Und Gott segnete Noah und seine Söhne und sprach: Seid fruchtbar und mehret euch und füllet die Erde.
Furcht und Schrecken vor euch sei über allen Tieren auf Erden und über allen Vögeln unter dem Himmel, über allem, was auf dem Erdboden wimmelt, und über allen Fischen im Meer; in eure Hände seien sie gegeben.
Alles, was sich regt und lebt, das sei eure Speise; wie das grüne Kraut habe ich's euch alles gegeben.
Allein esset das Fleisch nicht mit seinem Blut, in dem sein Leben ist!
Auch will ich euer eigen Blut, das ist das Leben eines jeden unter euch, rächen und will es von allen Tieren fordern und will des Menschen Leben fordern von einem jeden Menschen.
Wer Menschenblut vergie&szlig;t, dessen Blut soll auch durch Menschen vergossen werden; denn Gott hat den Menschen zu seinem Bilde gemacht.
Seid fruchtbar und mehret euch und reget euch auf Erden, da&szlig; euer viel darauf werden.
Und Gott sagte zu Noah und seinen Söhnen mit ihm:
Siehe, ich richte mit euch einen Bund auf und mit euren Nachkommen
und mit allem lebendigen Getier bei euch, an Vögeln, an Vieh und an allen Tieren des Feldes bei euch, von allem, was aus der Arche gegangen ist, was für Tiere es sind auf Erden.
Und ich richte meinen Bund so mit euch auf, da&szlig; hinfort nicht mehr alles Fleisch verderbt werden soll durch die Wasser der Sintflut und hinfort keine Sintflut mehr kommen soll, die die Erde verderbe.
Und Gott sprach: Das ist das Zeichen des Bundes, den ich geschlossen habe zwischen mir und euch und allem lebendigen Getier bei euch auf ewig:
Meinen Bogen habe ich in die Wolken gesetzt; der soll das Zeichen sein des Bundes zwischen mir und der Erde.
Und wenn es kommt, da&szlig; ich Wetterwolken über die Erde führe, so soll man meinen Bogen sehen in den Wolken.
Alsdann will ich gedenken an meinen Bund zwischen mir und euch und allem lebendigen Getier unter allem Fleisch, da&szlig; hinfort keine Sintflut mehr komme, die alles Fleisch verderbe.
Darum soll mein Bogen in den Wolken sein, da&szlig; ich ihn ansehe und gedenke an den ewigen Bund zwischen Gott und allem lebendigen Getier unter allem Fleisch, das auf Erden ist.
Und Gott sagte zu Noah: Das sei das Zeichen des Bundes, den ich aufgerichtet habe zwischen mir und allem Fleisch auf Erden. 
Die Söhne Noahs, die aus der Arche gingen, sind diese: Sem, Ham und Jafet. Ham aber ist der Vater Kanaans.
Das sind die drei Söhne Noahs; von ihnen kommen her alle Menschen auf Erden.
Noah aber, der Ackermann, pflanzte als erster einen Weinberg.
Und da er von dem Wein trank, ward er trunken und lag im Zelt aufgedeckt.
Als nun Ham, Kanaans Vater, seines Vaters Blö&szlig;e sah, sagte er's seinen beiden Brüdern drau&szlig;en.
Da nahmen Sem und Jafet ein Kleid und legten es auf ihrer beider Schultern und gingen rückwärts hinzu und deckten ihres Vaters Blö&szlig;e zu; und ihr Angesicht war abgewandt, damit sie ihres Vaters Blö&szlig;e nicht sähen.
Als nun Noah erwachte von seinem Rausch und erfuhr, was ihm sein jüngster Sohn angetan hatte,
sprach er: Verflucht sei Kanaan und sei seinen Brüdern ein Knecht aller Knechte!
Und sprach weiter: Gelobt sei der HERR, der Gott Sems, und Kanaan sei sein Knecht!
Gott breite Jafet aus und lasse ihn wohnen in den Zelten Sems, und Kanaan sei sein Knecht!
Noah aber lebte nach der Sintflut dreihundertundfünfzig Jahre,
da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter ward neunhundertundfünfzig Jahre, und starb. 
</P><hr><h3>10. Kapitel</h3><h3>Die Völkertafel</h3><h3>(vgl. 1. Chr 1,5-23)</h3>
<p>Dies ist das Geschlecht der Söhne Noahs: Sem, Ham und Jafet. Und es wurden ihnen Söhne geboren nach der Sintflut.
Die Söhne Jafets sind diese: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Jawan, Tubal, Meschech und Tiras.
Die Söhne Gomers sind diese: Aschkenas, Rifat und Togarma.
Die Söhne Jawans sind diese: Elischa, Tarsis, die Kittäer und die Rodaniter.
Von diesen haben sich ausgebreitet die Bewohner der Inseln der Heiden. Das sind die Söhne Jafets nach ihren Ländern, ihren Sprachen, Geschlechtern und Völkern.
Die Söhne Hams sind diese: Kusch, Mizrajim, Put und Kanaan.
Und die Söhne des Kusch sind diese: Seba, Hawila, Sabta, Ragma und Sabtecha. Aber die Söhne Ragmas sind diese: Saba und Dedan.
Kusch aber zeugte den Nimrod. Der war der erste, der Macht gewann auf Erden,
und war ein gewaltiger Jäger vor dem HERRN. Daher spricht man: Das ist ein gewaltiger Jäger vor dem HERRN wie Nimrod.
Und der Anfang seines Reichs war Babel, Erech, Akkad und Kalne im Lande Schinar.
Von diesem Lande ist er nach Assur gekommen und baute Ninive und Rehobot-Ir und Kelach,
dazu Resen zwischen Ninive und Kelach. Das ist die gro&szlig;e Stadt.
Mizrajim zeugte die Luditer, die Anamiter, die Lehabiter, die Naftuhiter,
die Patrositer, die Kasluhiter und die Kaftoriter; von denen sind gekommen die Philister.
Kanaan aber zeugte Sidon, seinen ersten Sohn, und Het
und den Jebusiter, den Amoriter, den Girgaschiter,
den Hiwiter, den Arkiter, den Siniter,
den Arwaditer, den Zemariter und den Hamatiter. Nachher haben sich die Geschlechter der Kanaaniter weiter ausgebreitet,
und ihre Grenzen waren von Sidon in der Richtung auf Gerar bis nach Gaza, in der Richtung auf Sodom, Gomorra, Adma, Zebojim bis nach Lescha.
Das sind die Söhne Hams nach ihren Geschlechtern, Sprachen, Ländern und Völkern.
Sem aber, dem Vater aller Söhne Ebers, Jafets älterem Bruder, wurden auch Söhne geboren.
Und dies sind seine Söhne: Elam, Assur, Arpachschad, Lud und Aram.
Aber die Söhne Arams sind diese: Uz, Hul, Geter und Masch.
Arpachschad aber zeugte Schelach, Schelach zeugte Eber.
Eber wurden zwei Söhne geboren. Einer hie&szlig; Peleg, weil zu seiner Zeit die Erde zerteilt wurde; und sein Bruder hie&szlig; Joktan.
Und Joktan zeugte Almodad, Schelef, Hazarmawet, Jerach,
Hadoram, Usal, Dikla,
Obal, Abimaël, Saba,
Ofir, Hawila und Jobab. Das sind alles Söhne Joktans.
Und ihre Wohnsitze waren von Mescha bis man kommt nach Sefar, an das Gebirge im Osten.
Das sind die Söhne Sems nach ihren Geschlechtern, Sprachen, Ländern und Völkern.
Das sind nun die Nachkommen der Söhne Noahs nach ihren Geschlechtern und Völkern. Von denen her haben sich ausgebreitet die Völker auf Erden nach der Sintflut. 
</P><hr><h3>11. Kapitel</h3><h3>Der Turmbau zu Babel</h3>
<p>Es hatte aber alle Welt einerlei Zunge und Sprache.
Als sie nun nach Osten zogen, fanden sie eine Ebene im Lande Schinar und wohnten daselbst.
Und sie sprachen untereinander: Wohlauf, la&szlig;t uns Ziegel streichen und brennen! - und nahmen Ziegel als Stein und Erdharz als Mörtel
und sprachen: Wohlauf, la&szlig;t uns eine Stadt und einen Turm bauen, dessen Spitze bis an den Himmel reiche, damit wir uns einen Namen machen; denn wir werden sonst zerstreut in alle Länder.
Da fuhr der HERR hernieder, da&szlig; er sähe die Stadt und den Turm, die die Menschenkinder bauten.
Und der HERR sprach: Siehe, es ist einerlei Volk und einerlei Sprache unter ihnen allen, und dies ist der Anfang ihres Tuns; nun wird ihnen nichts mehr verwehrt werden können von allem, was sie sich vorgenommen haben zu tun.
Wohlauf, la&szlig;t uns herniederfahren und dort ihre Sprache verwirren, da&szlig; keiner des andern Sprache verstehe!
So zerstreute sie der HERR von dort in alle Länder, da&szlig; sie aufhören mu&szlig;ten, die Stadt zu bauen.
Daher hei&szlig;t ihr Name Babel, weil der HERR daselbst verwirrt hat aller Länder Sprache und sie von dort zerstreut hat in alle Länder. 
Dies ist das Geschlecht Sems: Sem war 100 Jahre alt und zeugte Arpachschad zwei Jahre nach der Sintflut
und lebte danach 500 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Arpachschad war 35 Jahre alt und zeugte Schelach
und lebte danach 403 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Schelach war 30 Jahre alt und zeugte Eber
und lebte danach 403 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Eber war 34 Jahre alt und zeugte Peleg
und lebte danach 430 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Peleg war 30 Jahre alt und zeugte Regu
und lebte danach 209 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Regu war 32 Jahre alt und zeugte Serug
und lebte danach 207 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Serug war 30 Jahre alt und zeugte Nahor
und lebte danach 200 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Nahor war 29 Jahre alt und zeugte Terach
und lebte danach 119 Jahre und zeugte Söhne und Töchter.
Terach war 70 Jahre alt und zeugte Abram, Nahor und Haran. 
Dies ist das Geschlecht Terachs: Terach zeugte Abram, Nahor und Haran; und Haran zeugte Lot.
Haran aber starb vor seinem Vater Terach in seinem Vaterland zu Ur in Chaldäa.
Da nahmen sich Abram und Nahor Frauen. Abrams Frau hie&szlig; Sarai und Nahors Frau Milka, Harans Tochter, der der Vater war der Milka und der Jiska.
Aber Sarai war unfruchtbar und hatte kein Kind.
Da nahm Terach seinen Sohn Abram und Lot, den Sohn seines Sohnes Haran, und seine Schwiegertochter Sarai, die Frau seines Sohnes Abram, und führte sie aus Ur in Chaldäa, um ins Land Kanaan zu ziehen. Und sie kamen nach Haran und wohnten dort.
Und Terach wurde zweihundertundfünf Jahre alt und starb in Haran. 
</P><hr><h3>12. Kapitel</h3><h3>Abrams Berufung und Zug nach Kanaan</h3>
<p>Und der HERR sprach zu Abram: Geh aus deinem Vaterland und von deiner Verwandtschaft und aus deines Vaters Hause in ein Land, das ich dir zeigen will.
Und ich will dich zum gro&szlig;en Volk machen und will dich segnen und dir einen gro&szlig;en Namen machen, und du sollst ein Segen sein.
Ich will segnen, die dich segnen, und verfluchen, die dich verfluchen; und in dir sollen gesegnet werden alle Geschlechter auf Erden.
Da zog Abram aus, wie der HERR zu ihm gesagt hatte, und Lot zog mit ihm. Abram aber war fünfundsiebzig Jahre alt, als er aus Haran zog.
So nahm Abram Sarai, seine Frau, und Lot, seines Bruders Sohn, mit aller ihrer Habe, die sie gewonnen hatten, und die Leute, die sie erworben hatten in Haran, und zogen aus, um ins Land Kanaan zu reisen. Und sie kamen in das Land,
und Abram durchzog das Land bis an die Stätte bei Sichem, bis zur Eiche More; es wohnten aber zu der Zeit die Kanaaniter im Lande.
Da erschien der HERR dem Abram und sprach: Deinen Nachkommen will ich dies Land geben. Und er baute dort einen Altar dem HERRN, der ihm erschienen war.
Danach brach er von dort auf ins Gebirge östlich der Stadt Bethel und schlug sein Zelt auf, so da&szlig; er Bethel im Westen und Ai im Osten hatte, und baute dort dem HERRN einen Altar und rief den Namen des HERRN an.
Danach zog Abram weiter ins Südland. 
Es kam aber eine Hungersnot in das Land. Da zog Abram hinab nach Ägypten, da&szlig; er sich dort als ein Fremdling aufhielte; denn der Hunger war gro&szlig; im Lande.
Und als er nahe an Ägypten war, sprach er zu Sarai, seiner Frau: Siehe, ich wei&szlig;, da&szlig; du ein schönes Weib bist.
Wenn dich nun die Ägypter sehen, so werden sie sagen: Das ist seine Frau, und werden mich umbringen und dich leben lassen.
So sage doch, du seist meine Schwester, auf da&szlig; mir's wohlgehe um deinetwillen und ich am Leben bleibe um deinetwillen.
Als nun Abram nach Ägypten kam, sahen die Ägypter, da&szlig; seine Frau sehr schön war.
Und die Gro&szlig;en des Pharao sahen sie und priesen sie vor ihm. Da wurde sie in das Haus des Pharao gebracht.
Und er tat Abram Gutes um ihretwillen; und er bekam Schafe, Rinder, Esel, Knechte und Mägde, Eselinnen und Kamele.
Aber der HERR plagte den Pharao und sein Haus mit gro&szlig;en Plagen um Sarais, Abrams Frau, willen.
Da rief der Pharao Abram zu sich und sprach zu ihm: Warum hast du mir das angetan? Warum sagtest du mir nicht, da&szlig; sie deine Frau ist?
Warum sprachst du denn: Sie ist meine Schwester -, so da&szlig; ich sie mir zur Frau nahm? Und nun siehe, da hast du deine Frau; nimm sie und zieh hin.
Und der Pharao bestellte Leute um seinetwillen, da&szlig; sie ihn geleiteten und seine Frau und alles, was er hatte. 
</P><hr><h3>13. Kapitel</h3><h3>Abram und Lot trennen sich</h3>
<p>So zog Abram herauf aus Ägypten mit seiner Frau und mit allem, was er hatte, und Lot auch mit ihm, ins Südland.
Abram aber war sehr reich an Vieh, Silber und Gold.
Und er zog immer weiter vom Südland bis nach Bethel, an die Stätte, wo zuerst sein Zelt war, zwischen Bethel und Ai,
eben an den Ort, wo er früher den Altar errichtet hatte. Dort rief er den Namen des HERRN an.
Lot aber, der mit Abram zog, hatte auch Schafe und Rinder und Zelte.
Und das Land konnte es nicht ertragen, da&szlig; sie beieinander wohnten; denn ihre Habe war gro&szlig;, und sie konnten nicht beieinander wohnen.
Und es war immer Zank zwischen den Hirten von Abrams Vieh und den Hirten von Lots Vieh. Es wohnten auch zu der Zeit die Kanaaniter und Perisiter im Lande.
Da sprach Abram zu Lot: La&szlig; doch nicht Zank sein zwischen mir und dir und zwischen meinen und deinen Hirten; denn wir sind Brüder.
Steht dir nicht alles Land offen? Trenne dich doch von mir! Willst du zur Linken, so will ich zur Rechten, oder willst du zur Rechten, so will ich zur Linken.
Da hob Lot seine Augen auf und besah die ganze Gegend am Jordan. Denn ehe der HERR Sodom und Gomorra vernichtete, war sie wasserreich, bis man nach Zoar kommt, wie der Garten des HERRN, gleichwie Ägyptenland.
Da erwählte sich Lot die ganze Gegend am Jordan und zog nach Osten. Also trennte sich ein Bruder von dem andern,
so da&szlig; Abram wohnte im Lande Kanaan und Lot in den Städten am unteren Jordan. Und Lot zog mit seinen Zelten bis nach Sodom.
Aber die Leute zu Sodom waren böse und sündigten sehr wider den HERRN.
Als nun Lot sich von Abram getrennt hatte, sprach der HERR zu Abram: Hebe deine Augen auf und sieh von der Stätte aus, wo du wohnst, nach Norden, nach Süden, nach Osten und nach Westen.
Denn all das Land, das du siehst, will ich dir und deinen Nachkommen geben für alle Zeit
und will deine Nachkommen machen wie den Staub auf Erden. Kann ein Mensch den Staub auf Erden zählen, der wird auch deine Nachkommen zählen.
Darum mach dich auf und durchzieh das Land in die Länge und Breite, denn dir will ich's geben.
Und Abram zog weiter mit seinem Zelt und kam und wohnte im Hain Mamre, der bei Hebron ist, und baute dort dem HERRN einen Altar. 
</P><hr><h3>14. Kapitel</h3>
<p>Und es begab sich zu der Zeit des Königs Amrafel von Schinar, Arjochs, des Königs von Ellasar, Kedor- Laomers, des Königs von Elam, und Tidals, des Königs von Völkern,
da&szlig; sie Krieg führten mit Bera, dem König von Sodom, und mit Birscha, dem König von Gomorra, und mit Schinab, dem König von Adma, und mit Schemeber, dem König von Zebojim, und mit dem König von Bela, das ist Zoar.
Diese kamen alle zusammen in das Tal Siddim, wo nun das Salzmeer ist.
Denn sie waren zwölf Jahre dem König Kedor-Laomer untertan gewesen, und im dreizehnten Jahr waren sie von ihm abgefallen.
Darum kamen Kedor-Laomer und die Könige, die mit ihm waren, im vierzehnten Jahr und schlugen die Refaïter zu Aschterot-Karnajim und die Susiter zu Ham und die Emiter in der Ebene Kirjatajim
und die Horiter auf ihrem Gebirge Seïr bis El-Paran, das an die Wüste stö&szlig;t.
Danach wandten sie um und kamen nach En-Mischpat, das ist Kadesch, und schlugen das ganze Land der Amalekiter, dazu die Amoriter, die zu Hazezon-Tamar wohnten.
Da zogen aus der König von Sodom, der König von Gomorra, der König von Adma, der König von Zebojim und der König von Bela, das ist Zoar, und rüsteten sich, zu kämpfen im Tal Siddim
mit Kedor-Laomer, dem König von Elam, und mit Tidal, dem König von Völkern, und mit Amrafel, dem König von Schinar, und mit Arjoch, dem König von Ellasar, vier Könige gegen fünf.
Das Tal Siddim aber hatte viele Erdharzgruben. Und die Könige von Sodom und Gomorra wurden in die Flucht geschlagen und fielen da hinein, und was übrigblieb, floh auf das Gebirge.
Da nahmen sie alle Habe von Sodom und Gomorra und alle Vorräte und zogen davon.
Sie nahmen auch mit sich Lot, Abrams Brudersohn, und seine Habe, denn er wohnte in Sodom, und zogen davon.
Da kam einer, der entronnen war, und sagte es Abram an, dem Hebräer, der da wohnte im Hain Mamres, des Amoriters, des Bruders von Eschkol und Aner. Diese waren mit Abram im Bund.
Als nun Abram hörte, da&szlig; seines Bruders Sohn gefangen war, wappnete er seine Knechte, dreihundertundachtzehn, in seinem Hause geboren, und jagte ihnen nach bis Dan
und teilte seine Schar, fiel des Nachts über sie her mit seinen Knechten und schlug sie und jagte sie bis nach Hoba, das nördlich der Stadt Damaskus liegt.
Und er brachte alle Habe wieder zurück, dazu auch Lot, seines Bruders Sohn, mit seiner Habe, auch die Frauen und das Volk.
Als er nun zurückkam von dem Sieg über Kedor-Laomer und die Könige mit ihm, ging ihm entgegen der König von Sodom in das Tal Schawe, das ist das Königstal.
Aber Melchisedek, der König von Salem, trug Brot und Wein heraus. Und er war ein Priester Gottes des Höchsten
und segnete ihn und sprach: Gesegnet seist du, Abram, vom höchsten Gott, der Himmel und Erde geschaffen hat;
und gelobt sei Gott der Höchste, der deine Feinde in deine Hand gegeben hat. Und Abram gab ihm den Zehnten von allem.
Da sprach der König von Sodom zu Abram: Gib mir die Leute, die Güter behalte für dich!
Aber Abram sprach zu dem König von Sodom: Ich hebe meine Hand auf zu dem HERRN, dem höchsten Gott, der Himmel und Erde geschaffen hat,
da&szlig; ich von allem, was dein ist, nicht einen Faden noch einen Schuhriemen nehmen will, damit du nicht sagest, du habest Abram reich gemacht,
ausgenommen, was die Knechte verzehrt haben; doch la&szlig; die Männer Aner, Eschkol und Mamre, die mit mir gezogen sind, ihr Teil nehmen. 
</P><hr><h3>15. Kapitel</h3><h3>Gott verhei&szlig;t Abram einen Sohn und gewährt ihm den Bund</h3><h3>(vgl. Kap 17)</h3>
<p>Nach diesen Geschichten begab sich's, da&szlig; zu Abram das Wort des HERRN kam in einer Offenbarung: Fürchte dich nicht, Abram! Ich bin dein Schild und dein sehr gro&szlig;er Lohn.
Abram sprach aber: HERR, mein Gott, was willst du mir geben? Ich gehe dahin ohne Kinder, und mein Knecht Elïser von Damaskus wird mein Haus besitzen.
Und Abram sprach weiter: Mir hast du keine Nachkommen gegeben; und siehe, einer von meinen Knechten wird mein Erbe sein.
Und siehe, der HERR sprach zu ihm: Er soll nicht dein Erbe sein, sondern der von deinem Leibe kommen wird, der soll dein Erbe sein.
Und er hie&szlig; ihn hinausgehen und sprach: Sieh gen Himmel und zähle die Sterne; kannst du sie zählen? Und sprach zu ihm: So zahlreich sollen deine Nachkommen sein!
Abram glaubte dem HERRN, und das rechnete er ihm zur Gerechtigkeit.
Und er sprach zu ihm: Ich bin der HERR, der dich aus Ur in Chaldäa geführt hat, auf da&szlig; ich dir dies Land zu besitzen gebe.
Abram aber sprach: HERR, mein Gott, woran soll ich merken, da&szlig; ich's besitzen werde?
Und er sprach zu ihm: Bringe mir eine dreijährige Kuh, eine dreijährige Ziege, einen dreijährigen Widder, eine Turteltaube und eine andere Taube.
Und er brachte ihm dies alles und zerteilte es in der Mitte und legte je einen Teil dem andern gegenüber; aber die Vögel zerteilte er nicht.
Und die Raubvögel stie&szlig;en hernieder auf die Stücke, aber Abram scheuchte sie davon.
Als nun die Sonne am Untergehen war, fiel ein tiefer Schlaf auf Abram, und siehe, Schrecken und gro&szlig;e Finsternis überfiel ihn.
Da sprach der HERR zu Abram: Das sollst du wissen, da&szlig; deine Nachkommen werden Fremdlinge sein in einem Lande, das nicht das ihre ist; und da wird man sie zu dienen zwingen und plagen vierhundert Jahre.
Aber ich will das Volk richten, dem sie dienen müssen. Danach sollen sie ausziehen mit gro&szlig;em Gut.
Und du sollst fahren zu deinen Vätern mit Frieden und in gutem Alter begraben werden.
Sie aber sollen erst nach vier Menschenaltern wieder hierher kommen; denn die Missetat der Amoriter ist noch nicht voll.
Als nun die Sonne untergegangen und es finster geworden war, siehe, da war ein rauchender Ofen, und eine Feuerflamme fuhr zwischen den Stücken hin.
An dem Tage schlo&szlig; der HERR einen Bund mit Abram und sprach: Deinen Nachkommen will ich dies Land geben, von dem Strom Ägyptens an bis an den gro&szlig;en Strom Euphrat:
die Keniter, die Kenasiter, die Kadmoniter,
die Hetiter, die Perisiter, die Refaïter,
die Amoriter, die Kanaaniter, die Girgaschiter, die Jebusiter. 
</P><hr><h3>16. Kapitel</h3><h3>Hagar und Ismael</h3><h3>(vgl. Kap 21,9-21)</h3>
<p>Sarai, Abrams Frau, gebar ihm kein Kind. Sie hatte aber eine ägyptische Magd, die hie&szlig; Hagar.
Und Sarai sprach zu Abram: Siehe, der HERR hat mich verschlossen, da&szlig; ich nicht gebären kann. Geh doch zu meiner Magd, ob ich vielleicht durch sie zu einem Sohn komme. Und Abram gehorchte der Stimme Sarais.
Da nahm Sarai, Abrams Frau, ihre ägyptische Magd Hagar und gab sie Abram, ihrem Mann, zur Frau, nachdem sie zehn Jahre im Lande Kanaan gewohnt hatten.
Und er ging zu Hagar, die ward schwanger. Als sie nun sah, da&szlig; sie schwanger war, achtete sie ihre Herrin gering.
Da sprach Sarai zu Abram: Das Unrecht, das mir geschieht, komme über dich! Ich habe meine Magd dir in die Arme gegeben; nun sie aber sieht, da&szlig; sie schwanger geworden ist, bin ich gering geachtet in ihren Augen. Der HERR sei Richter zwischen mir und dir.
Abram aber sprach zu Sarai: Siehe, deine Magd ist unter deiner Gewalt; tu mit ihr, wie dir's gefällt. Als nun Sarai sie demütigen wollte, floh sie von ihr.
Aber der Engel des HERRN fand sie bei einer Wasserquelle in der Wüste, nämlich bei der Quelle am Wege nach Schur.
Der sprach zu ihr: Hagar, Sarais Magd, wo kommst du her, und wo willst du hin? Sie sprach: Ich bin von Sarai, meiner Herrin, geflohen.
Und der Engel des HERRN sprach zu ihr: Kehre wieder um zu deiner Herrin und demütige dich unter ihre Hand.
Und der Engel des HERRN sprach zu ihr: Ich will deine Nachkommen so mehren, da&szlig; sie der gro&szlig;en Menge wegen nicht gezählt werden können.
Weiter sprach der Engel des HERRN zu ihr: Siehe, du bist schwanger geworden und wirst einen Sohn gebären, dessen Namen sollst du Ismael nennen; denn der HERR hat dein Elend erhört.
Er wird ein wilder Mensch sein; seine Hand wider jedermann und jedermanns Hand wider ihn, und er wird wohnen all seinen Brüdern zum Trotz.
Und sie nannte den Namen des HERRN, der mit ihr redete: Du bist ein Gott, der mich sieht. Denn sie sprach: Gewi&szlig; hab ich hier hinter dem hergesehen, der mich angesehen hat.
Darum nannte man den Brunnen "Brunnen des Lebendigen, der mich sieht". Er liegt zwischen Kadesch und Bered.
Und Hagar gebar Abram einen Sohn, und Abram nannte den Sohn, den ihm Hagar gebar, Ismael.
Und Abram war sechsundachtzig Jahre alt, als ihm Hagar den Ismael gebar. 
</P><hr><h3>17. Kapitel</h3><h3>Ewiger Bund und neue Namen. Verhei&szlig;ung Isaaks und Beschneidung</h3>
<p>Als nun Abram neunundneunzig Jahre alt war, erschien ihm der HERR und sprach zu ihm: Ich bin der allmächtige Gott; wandle vor mir und sei fromm.
Und ich will meinen Bund zwischen mir und dir schlie&szlig;en und will dich über alle Ma&szlig;en mehren.
Da fiel Abram auf sein Angesicht. Und Gott redete weiter mit ihm und sprach:
Siehe, ich habe meinen Bund mit dir, und du sollst ein Vater vieler Völker werden.
Darum sollst du nicht mehr Abram hei&szlig;en, sondern Abraham soll dein Name sein; denn ich habe dich gemacht zum Vater vieler Völker.
Und ich will dich sehr fruchtbar machen und will aus dir Völker machen, und auch Könige sollen von dir kommen.
Und ich will aufrichten meinen Bund zwischen mir und dir und deinen Nachkommen von Geschlecht zu Geschlecht, da&szlig; es ein ewiger Bund sei, so da&szlig; ich dein und deiner Nachkommen Gott bin.
Und ich will dir und deinem Geschlecht nach dir das Land geben, darin du ein Fremdling bist, das ganze Land Kanaan, zu ewigem Besitz, und will ihr Gott sein.
Und Gott sprach zu Abraham: So haltet nun meinen Bund, du und deine Nachkommen von Geschlecht zu Geschlecht.
Das aber ist mein Bund, den ihr halten sollt zwischen mir und euch und deinem Geschlecht nach dir: Alles, was männlich ist unter euch, soll beschnitten werden;
eure Vorhaut sollt ihr beschneiden. Das soll das Zeichen sein des Bundes zwischen mir und euch.
Jedes Knäblein, wenn's acht Tage alt ist, sollt ihr beschneiden bei euren Nachkommen. Desgleichen auch alles, was an Gesinde im Hause geboren oder was gekauft ist von irgendwelchen Fremden, die nicht aus eurem Geschlecht sind.
Beschnitten soll werden alles Gesinde, was dir im Hause geboren oder was gekauft ist. Und so soll mein Bund an eurem Fleisch zu einem ewigen Bund werden.
Wenn aber ein Männlicher nicht beschnitten wird an seiner Vorhaut, wird er ausgerottet werden aus seinem Volk, weil er meinen Bund gebrochen hat.
Und Gott sprach abermals zu Abraham: Du sollst Sarai, deine Frau, nicht mehr Sarai nennen, sondern Sara soll ihr Name sein.
Denn ich will sie segnen, und auch von ihr will ich dir einen Sohn geben; ich will sie segnen, und Völker sollen aus ihr werden und Könige über viele Völker.
Da fiel Abraham auf sein Angesicht und lachte und sprach in seinem Herzen: Soll mir mit hundert Jahren ein Kind geboren werden, und soll Sara, neunzig Jahre alt, gebären?
Und Abraham sprach zu Gott: Ach da&szlig; Ismael möchte leben bleiben vor dir!
Da sprach Gott: Nein, Sara, deine Frau, wird dir einen Sohn gebären, den sollst du Isaak nennen, und mit ihm will ich meinen ewigen Bund aufrichten und mit seinem Geschlecht nach ihm.
Und für Ismael habe ich dich auch erhört. Siehe, ich habe ihn gesegnet und will ihn fruchtbar machen und über alle Ma&szlig;en mehren. Zwölf Fürsten wird er zeugen, und ich will ihn zum gro&szlig;en Volk machen.
Aber meinen Bund will ich aufrichten mit Isaak, den dir Sara gebären soll um diese Zeit im nächsten Jahr.
Und er hörte auf, mit ihm zu reden. Und Gott fuhr auf von Abraham.
Da nahm Abraham seinen Sohn Ismael und alle Knechte, die im Hause geboren, und alle, die gekauft waren, und alles, was männlich war in seinem Hause, und beschnitt ihre Vorhaut an eben diesem Tage, wie ihm Gott gesagt hatte.
Und Abraham war neunundneunzig Jahre alt, als er seine Vorhaut beschnitt.
Ismael aber, sein Sohn, war dreizehn Jahre alt, als seine Vorhaut beschnitten wurde.
Eben auf diesen Tag wurden sie alle beschnitten, Abraham, sein Sohn Ismael,
und was männlich in seinem Hause war, im Hause geboren und gekauft von Fremden; es wurde alles mit ihm beschnitten. 
</P><hr><h3>18. Kapitel</h3><h3>Der HERR bei Abraham in Mamre</h3>
<p>Und der HERR erschien ihm im Hain Mamre, während er an der Tür seines Zeltes sa&szlig;, als der Tag am hei&szlig;esten war.
Und als er seine Augen aufhob und sah, siehe, da standen drei Männer vor ihm. Und als er sie sah, lief er ihnen entgegen von der Tür seines Zeltes und neigte sich zur Erde
und sprach: Herr, hab ich Gnade gefunden vor deinen Augen, so geh nicht an deinem Knecht vorüber.
Man soll euch ein wenig Wasser bringen, eure Fü&szlig;e zu waschen, und la&szlig;t euch nieder unter dem Baum.
Und ich will euch einen Bissen Brot bringen, da&szlig; ihr euer Herz labet; danach mögt ihr weiterziehen. Denn darum seid ihr bei eurem Knecht vorübergekommen. Sie sprachen: Tu, wie du gesagt hast.
Abraham eilte in das Zelt zu Sara und sprach: Eile und menge drei Ma&szlig; feinstes Mehl, knete und backe Kuchen.
Er aber lief zu den Rindern und holte ein zartes gutes Kalb und gab's dem Knechte; der eilte und bereitete es zu.
Und er trug Butter und Milch auf und von dem Kalbe, das er zubereitet hatte, und setzte es ihnen vor und blieb stehen vor ihnen unter dem Baum, und sie a&szlig;en.
Da sprachen sie zu ihm: Wo ist Sara, deine Frau? Er antwortete: Drinnen im Zelt.
Da sprach er: Ich will wieder zu dir kommen übers Jahr; siehe, dann soll Sara, deine Frau, einen Sohn haben. Das hörte Sara hinter ihm, hinter der Tür des Zeltes.
Und sie waren beide, Abraham und Sara, alt und hochbetagt, so da&szlig; es Sara nicht mehr ging nach der Frauen Weise.
Darum lachte sie bei sich selbst und sprach: Nun ich alt bin, soll ich noch der Liebe pflegen, und mein Herr ist auch alt!
Da sprach der HERR zu Abraham: Warum lacht Sara und spricht: Meinst du, da&szlig; es wahr sei, da&szlig; ich noch gebären werde, die ich doch alt bin?
Sollte dem HERRN etwas unmöglich sein? Um diese Zeit will ich wieder zu dir kommen übers Jahr; dann soll Sara einen Sohn haben.
Da leugnete Sara und sprach: Ich habe nicht gelacht -, denn sie fürchtete sich. Aber er sprach: Es ist nicht so, du hast gelacht. 
Da brachen die Männer auf und wandten sich nach Sodom, und Abraham ging mit ihnen, um sie zu geleiten.
Da sprach der HERR: Wie könnte ich Abraham verbergen, was ich tun will,
da er doch ein gro&szlig;es und mächtiges Volk werden soll und alle Völker auf Erden in ihm gesegnet werden sollen?
Denn dazu habe ich ihn auserkoren, da&szlig; er seinen Kindern befehle und seinem Hause nach ihm, da&szlig; sie des HERRN Wege halten und tun, was recht und gut ist, auf da&szlig; der HERR auf Abraham kommen lasse, was er ihm verhei&szlig;en hat.
Und der HERR sprach: Es ist ein gro&szlig;es Geschrei über Sodom und Gomorra, da&szlig; ihre Sünden sehr schwer sind.
Darum will ich hinabfahren und sehen, ob sie alles getan haben nach dem Geschrei, das vor mich gekommen ist, oder ob's nicht so sei, damit ich's wisse.
Und die Männer wandten ihr Angesicht und gingen nach Sodom. Aber Abraham blieb stehen vor dem HERRN
und trat zu ihm und sprach: Willst du denn den Gerechten mit dem Gottlosen umbringen?
Es könnten vielleicht fünfzig Gerechte in der Stadt sein; wolltest du die umbringen und dem Ort nicht vergeben um fünfzig Gerechter willen, die darin wären?
Das sei ferne von dir, da&szlig; du das tust und tötest den Gerechten mit dem Gottlosen, so da&szlig; der Gerechte wäre gleich wie der Gottlose! Das sei ferne von dir! Sollte der Richter aller Welt nicht gerecht richten?
Der HERR sprach: Finde ich fünfzig Gerechte zu Sodom in der Stadt, so will ich um ihretwillen dem ganzen Ort vergeben.
Abraham antwortete und sprach: Ach siehe, ich habe mich unterwunden, zu reden mit dem Herrn, wiewohl ich Erde und Asche bin.
Es könnten vielleicht fünf weniger als fünfzig Gerechte darin sein; wolltest du denn die ganze Stadt verderben um der fünf willen? Er sprach: Finde ich darin fünfundvierzig, so will ich sie nicht verderben.
Und er fuhr fort mit ihm zu reden und sprach: Man könnte vielleicht vierzig darin finden. Er aber sprach: Ich will ihnen nichts tun um der vierzig willen.
Abraham sprach: Zürne nicht, Herr, da&szlig; ich noch mehr rede. Man könnte vielleicht drei&szlig;ig darin finden. Er aber sprach: Finde ich drei&szlig;ig darin, so will ich ihnen nichts tun.
Und er sprach: Ach siehe, ich habe mich unterwunden, mit dem Herrn zu reden. Man könnte vielleicht zwanzig darin finden. Er antwortete: Ich will sie nicht verderben um der zwanzig willen.
Und er sprach: Ach, zürne nicht, Herr, da&szlig; ich nur noch einmal rede. Man könnte vielleicht zehn darin finden. Er aber sprach: Ich will sie nicht verderben um der zehn willen.
Und der HERR ging weg, nachdem er aufgehört hatte, mit Abraham zu reden; und Abraham kehrte wieder um an seinen Ort. 
</P><hr><h3>19. Kapitel</h3><h3>Untergang von Sodom und Gomorra. Lots Errettung</h3>
<p>Die zwei Engel kamen nach Sodom am Abend; Lot aber sa&szlig; zu Sodom unter dem Tor. Und als er sie sah, stand er auf, ging ihnen entgegen und neigte sich bis zur Erde
und sprach: Siehe, liebe Herren, kehrt doch ein im Hause eures Knechts und bleibt über Nacht; la&szlig;t eure Fü&szlig;e waschen und brecht frühmorgens auf und zieht eure Stra&szlig;e. Aber sie sprachen: Nein, wir wollen über Nacht im Freien bleiben.
Da nötigte er sie sehr, und sie kehrten zu ihm ein und kamen in sein Haus. Und er machte ihnen ein Mahl und backte ungesäuerte Kuchen, und sie a&szlig;en.
Aber ehe sie sich legten, kamen die Männer der Stadt Sodom und umgaben das Haus, jung und alt, das ganze Volk aus allen Enden,
und riefen Lot und sprachen zu ihm: Wo sind die Männer, die zu dir gekommen sind diese Nacht? Führe sie heraus zu uns, da&szlig; wir uns über sie her machen.
Lot ging heraus zu ihnen vor die Tür und schlo&szlig; die Tür hinter sich zu
und sprach: Ach, liebe Brüder, tut nicht so übel!
Siehe, ich habe zwei Töchter, die wissen noch von keinem Manne; die will ich herausgeben unter euch, und tut mit ihnen, was euch gefällt; aber diesen Männern tut nichts, denn darum sind sie unter den Schatten meines Dachs gekommen.
Sie aber sprachen: Weg mit dir! Und sprachen auch: Du bist der einzige Fremdling hier und willst regieren? Wohlan, wir wollen dich noch übler plagen als jene. Und sie drangen hart ein auf den Mann Lot. Doch als sie hinzuliefen und die Tür aufbrechen wollten,
griffen die Männer hinaus und zogen Lot herein zu sich ins Haus und schlossen die Tür zu.
Und sie schlugen die Leute vor der Tür des Hauses, klein und gro&szlig;, mit Blindheit, so da&szlig; sie es aufgaben, die Tür zu finden.
Und die Männer sprachen zu Lot: Hast du hier noch einen Schwiegersohn und Söhne und Töchter und wer dir sonst angehört in der Stadt, den führe weg von dieser Stätte.
Denn wir werden diese Stätte verderben, weil das Geschrei über sie gro&szlig; ist vor dem HERRN; der hat uns gesandt, sie zu verderben.
Da ging Lot hinaus und redete mit den Männern, die seine Töchter heiraten sollten: Macht euch auf und geht aus diesem Ort, denn der HERR wird diese Stadt verderben. Aber es war ihnen lächerlich.
Als nun die Morgenröte aufging, drängten die Engel Lot zur Eile und sprachen: Mach dich auf, nimm deine Frau und deine beiden Töchter, die hier sind, damit du nicht auch umkommst in der Missetat dieser Stadt.
Als er aber zögerte, ergriffen die Männer ihn und seine Frau und seine beiden Töchter bei der Hand, weil der HERR ihn verschonen wollte, und führten ihn hinaus und lie&szlig;en ihn erst drau&szlig;en vor der Stadt wieder los.
Und als sie ihn hinausgebracht hatten, sprach der eine: Rette dein Leben und sieh nicht hinter dich, bleib auch nicht stehen in dieser ganzen Gegend. Auf das Gebirge rette dich, damit du nicht umkommst!
Aber Lot sprach zu ihnen: Ach nein, Herr!
Siehe, dein Knecht hat Gnade gefunden vor deinen Augen, und du hast deine Barmherzigkeit gro&szlig; gemacht, die du an mir getan hast, als du mich am Leben erhieltest. Ich kann mich nicht auf das Gebirge retten; es könnte mich sonst das Unheil ereilen, so da&szlig; ich stürbe.
Siehe, da ist eine Stadt nahe, in die ich fliehen kann, und sie ist klein; dahin will ich mich retten - ist sie doch klein -, damit ich am Leben bleibe.
Da sprach er zu ihm: Siehe, ich habe auch darin dich angesehen, da&szlig; ich die Stadt nicht zerstöre, von der du geredet hast.
Eile und rette dich dahin; denn ich kann nichts tun, bis du hineinkommst. Daher ist diese Stadt Zoar genannt.
Und die Sonne war aufgegangen auf Erden, als Lot nach Zoar kam.
Da lie&szlig; der HERR Schwefel und Feuer regnen vom Himmel herab auf Sodom und Gomorra
und vernichtete die Städte und die ganze Gegend und alle Einwohner der Städte und was auf dem Lande gewachsen war.
Und Lots Weib sah hinter sich und ward zur Salzsäule.
Abraham aber machte sich früh am Morgen auf an den Ort, wo er vor dem HERRN gestanden hatte,
und wandte sein Angesicht gegen Sodom und Gomorra und alles Land dieser Gegend und schaute, und siehe, da ging ein Rauch auf vom Lande wie der Rauch von einem Ofen.
Und es geschah, als Gott die Städte in der Gegend vernichtete, gedachte er an Abraham und geleitete Lot aus den Städten, die er zerstörte, in denen Lot gewohnt hatte. 
Und Lot zog weg von Zoar und blieb auf dem Gebirge mit seinen beiden Töchtern; denn er fürchtete sich, in Zoar zu bleiben; und so blieb er in einer Höhle mit seinen beiden Töchtern.
Da sprach die ältere zu der jüngeren: Unser Vater ist alt, und kein Mann ist mehr im Lande, der zu uns eingehen könnte nach aller Welt Weise.
So komm, la&szlig; uns unserm Vater Wein zu trinken geben und uns zu ihm legen, da&szlig; wir uns Nachkommen schaffen von unserm Vater.
Da gaben sie ihrem Vater Wein zu trinken in derselben Nacht. Und die erste ging hinein und legte sich zu ihrem Vater; und er ward's nicht gewahr, als sie sich legte noch als sie aufstand.
Am Morgen sprach die ältere zu der jüngeren: Siehe, ich habe gestern bei meinem Vater gelegen. La&szlig; uns ihm auch diese Nacht Wein zu trinken geben, da&szlig; du hineingehst und dich zu ihm legst, damit wir uns Nachkommen schaffen von unserm Vater.
Da gaben sie ihrem Vater auch diese Nacht Wein zu trinken. Und die jüngere machte sich auch auf und legte sich zu ihm; und er ward's nicht gewahr, als sie sich legte noch als sie aufstand.
So wurden die beiden Töchter Lots schwanger von ihrem Vater.
Und die ältere gebar einen Sohn, den nannte sie Moab. Von dem kommen her die Moabiter bis auf den heutigen Tag.
Und die jüngere gebar auch einen Sohn, den nannte sie Ben-Ammi. Von dem kommen her die Ammoniter bis auf den heutigen Tag. 
</P><hr><h3>20. Kapitel</h3><h3>Abraham und Sara bei Abimelech</h3><h3>(vgl. Kap 12,10-20; 26,1-11)</h3>
<p>Abraham aber zog von dannen ins Südland und wohnte zwischen Kadesch und Schur und lebte nun als ein Fremdling zu Gerar.
Er sagte aber von Sara, seiner Frau: Sie ist meine Schwester. Da sandte Abimelech, der König von Gerar, hin und lie&szlig; sie holen.
Aber Gott kam zu Abimelech des Nachts im Traum und sprach zu ihm: Siehe, du bist des Todes um des Weibes willen, das du genommen hast; denn sie ist eines Mannes Ehefrau.
Abimelech aber hatte sie nicht berührt und sprach: Herr, willst du denn auch ein gerechtes Volk umbringen?
Hat er nicht zu mir gesagt: sie ist meine Schwester? Und sie hat auch gesagt: er ist mein Bruder. Hab ich das doch getan mit einfältigem Herzen und unschuldigen Händen.
Und Gott sprach zu ihm im Traum: Ich wei&szlig; auch, da&szlig; du das mit einfältigem Herzen getan hast. Darum habe ich dich auch behütet, da&szlig; du nicht wider mich sündigtest, und habe es nicht zugelassen, da&szlig; du sie berührtest.
So gib nun dem Mann seine Frau wieder, denn er ist ein Prophet, und la&szlig; ihn für dich bitten, so wirst du am Leben bleiben. Wenn du sie aber nicht wiedergibst, so wisse, da&szlig; du des Todes sterben mu&szlig;t und alles, was dein ist.
Da stand Abimelech früh am Morgen auf und rief alle seine Gro&szlig;en und sagte dieses alles vor ihren Ohren. Und die Männer fürchteten sich sehr.
Und Abimelech rief Abraham auch herzu und sprach zu ihm: Warum hast du uns das angetan? Und was habe ich an dir gesündigt, da&szlig; du eine so gro&szlig;e Sünde wolltest auf mich und mein Reich bringen? Du hast an mir gehandelt, wie man nicht handeln soll.
Und Abimelech sprach weiter zu Abraham: Wie bist du dazu gekommen, da&szlig; du solches getan hast?
Abraham sprach: Ich dachte, gewi&szlig; ist keine Gottesfurcht an diesem Orte, und sie werden mich um meiner Frau willen umbringen.
Auch ist sie wahrhaftig meine Schwester, denn sie ist meines Vaters Tochter, aber nicht meiner Mutter Tochter; so ist sie meine Frau geworden.
Als mich aber Gott aus meines Vaters Hause wandern hie&szlig;, sprach ich zu ihr: Die Liebe tu mir an, da&szlig;, wo wir hinkommen, du von mir sagst, ich sei dein Bruder.
Da nahm Abimelech Schafe und Rinder, Knechte und Mägde und gab sie Abraham und gab ihm Sara, seine Frau, wieder
und sprach: Siehe da, mein Land steht dir offen; wohne, wo dir's wohlgefällt.
Und zu Sara sprach er: Siehe da, ich habe deinem Bruder tausend Silberstücke gegeben; siehe, das soll eine Decke sein über den Augen aller, die bei dir sind, dir zugute. Damit ist dir bei allen Recht verschafft.
Abraham aber betete zu Gott. Da heilte Gott Abimelech und seine Frau und seine Mägde, da&szlig; sie wieder Kinder gebaren.
Denn der HERR hatte zuvor hart verschlossen jeden Mutterscho&szlig; im Hause Abimelechs um Saras, Abrahams Frau, willen. 
</P><hr><h3>21. Kapitel</h3><h3>Isaaks Geburt</h3>
<p>Und der HERR suchte Sara heim, wie er gesagt hatte, und tat an ihr, wie er geredet hatte.
Und Sara ward schwanger und gebar dem Abraham in seinem Alter einen Sohn um die Zeit, von der Gott zu ihm geredet hatte.
Und Abraham nannte seinen Sohn, der ihm geboren war, Isaak, den ihm Sara gebar,
und beschnitt ihn am achten Tage, wie ihm Gott geboten hatte.
Hundert Jahre war Abraham alt, als ihm sein Sohn Isaak geboren wurde.
Und Sara sprach: Gott hat mir ein Lachen zugerichtet; denn wer es hören wird, der wird über mich lachen.
Und sie sprach: Wer hätte wohl von Abraham gesagt, da&szlig; Sara Kinder stille! Und doch habe ich ihm einen Sohn geboren in seinem Alter. 
Und das Kind wuchs heran und wurde entwöhnt. Und Abraham machte ein gro&szlig;es Mahl am Tage, da Isaak entwöhnt wurde.
Und Sara sah den Sohn Hagars, der Ägypterin, den sie Abraham geboren hatte, wie er Mutwillen trieb.
Da sprach sie zu Abraham: Treibe diese Magd aus mit ihrem Sohn; denn der Sohn dieser Magd soll nicht erben mit meinem Sohn Isaak.
Das Wort mi&szlig;fiel Abraham sehr um seines Sohnes willen.
Aber Gott sprach zu ihm: La&szlig; es dir nicht mi&szlig;fallen wegen des Knaben und der Magd. Alles, was Sara dir gesagt hat, dem gehorche; denn nur nach Isaak soll dein Geschlecht benannt werden.
Aber auch den Sohn der Magd will ich zu einem Volk machen, weil er dein Sohn ist.
Da stand Abraham früh am Morgen auf und nahm Brot und einen Schlauch mit Wasser und legte es Hagar auf ihre Schulter, dazu den Knaben, und schickte sie fort. Da zog sie hin und irrte in der Wüste umher bei Beerscheba.
Als nun das Wasser in dem Schlauch ausgegangen war, warf sie den Knaben unter einen Strauch
und ging hin und setzte sich gegenüber von ferne, einen Bogenschu&szlig; weit; denn sie sprach: Ich kann nicht ansehen des Knaben Sterben. Und sie setzte sich gegenüber und erhob ihre Stimme und weinte.
Da erhörte Gott die Stimme des Knaben. Und der Engel Gottes rief Hagar vom Himmel her und sprach zu ihr: Was ist dir, Hagar? Fürchte dich nicht; denn Gott hat gehört die Stimme des Knaben, der dort liegt.
Steh auf, nimm den Knaben und führe ihn an deiner Hand; denn ich will ihn zum gro&szlig;en Volk machen.
Und Gott tat ihr die Augen auf, da&szlig; sie einen Wasserbrunnen sah. Da ging sie hin und füllte den Schlauch mit Wasser und tränkte den Knaben.
Und Gott war mit dem Knaben. Der wuchs heran und wohnte in der Wüste und wurde ein guter Schütze.
Und er wohnte in der Wüste Paran, und seine Mutter nahm ihm eine Frau aus Ägyptenland.
[Note: Abrahams Bund mit Abimelech][Note: (vgl. Kap 26,15-33)]Zu der Zeit redete Abimelech zusammen mit Pichol, seinem Feldhauptmann, zu Abraham und sprach: Gott ist mit dir in allem, was du tust.
So schwöre mir nun bei Gott, da&szlig; du mir und meinen Söhnen und meinen Enkeln keine Untreue erweisen wollest, sondern die Barmherzigkeit, die ich an dir getan habe, an mir auch tust und an dem Lande, darin du ein Fremdling bist.
Da sprach Abraham: Ich will schwören.
Und Abraham stellte Abimelech zur Rede um des Wasserbrunnens willen, den Abimelechs Knechte mit Gewalt genommen hatten.
Da antwortete Abimelech: Ich habe es nicht gewu&szlig;t, wer das getan hat; weder hast du mir's angesagt, noch hab ich's gehört bis heute.
Da nahm Abraham Schafe und Rinder und gab sie Abimelech, und die beiden schlossen einen Bund miteinander.
Und Abraham stellte sieben Lämmer besonders.
Da sprach Abimelech zu Abraham: Was sollen die sieben Lämmer, die du besonders gestellt hast?
Er antwortete: Sieben Lämmer sollst du von meiner Hand nehmen, damit sie für mich ein Zeugnis seien, da&szlig; ich diesen Brunnen gegraben habe.
Daher hei&szlig;t die Stätte Beerscheba, weil sie beide miteinander da geschworen haben.
Und so schlossen sie den Bund zu Beerscheba. Da machten sich auf Abimelech und Pichol, sein Feldhauptmann, und zogen wieder in der Philister Land.
Abraham aber pflanzte einen Tamariskenbaum in Beerscheba und rief dort den Namen des HERRN, des ewigen Gottes, an.
Und er war ein Fremdling in der Philister Lande eine lange Zeit. 
</P><hr><h3>22. Kapitel</h3><h3>Abrahams Versuchung. Bestätigung der Verhei&szlig;ung</h3>
<p>Nach diesen Geschichten versuchte Gott Abraham und sprach zu ihm: Abraham! Und er antwortete: Hier bin ich.
Und er sprach: Nimm Isaak, deinen einzigen Sohn, den du liebhast, und geh hin in das Land Morija und opfere ihn dort zum Brandopfer auf einem Berge, den ich dir sagen werde.
Da stand Abraham früh am Morgen auf und gürtete seinen Esel und nahm mit sich zwei Knechte und seinen Sohn Isaak und spaltete Holz zum Brandopfer, machte sich auf und ging hin an den Ort, von dem ihm Gott gesagt hatte.
Am dritten Tage hob Abraham seine Augen auf und sah die Stätte von ferne
und sprach zu seinen Knechten: Bleibt ihr hier mit dem Esel. Ich und der Knabe wollen dorthin gehen, und wenn wir angebetet haben, wollen wir wieder zu euch kommen.
Und Abraham nahm das Holz zum Brandopfer und legte es auf seinen Sohn Isaak. Er aber nahm das Feuer und das Messer in seine Hand; und gingen die beiden miteinander.
Da sprach Isaak zu seinem Vater Abraham: Mein Vater! Abraham antwortete: Hier bin ich, mein Sohn. Und er sprach: Siehe, hier ist Feuer und Holz; wo ist aber das Schaf zum Brandopfer?
Abraham antwortete: Mein Sohn, Gott wird sich ersehen ein Schaf zum Brandopfer. Und gingen die beiden miteinander.
Und als sie an die Stätte kamen, die ihm Gott gesagt hatte, baute Abraham dort einen Altar und legte das Holz darauf und band seinen Sohn Isaak, legte ihn auf den Altar oben auf das Holz
und reckte seine Hand aus und fa&szlig;te das Messer, da&szlig; er seinen Sohn schlachtete.
Da rief ihn der Engel des HERRN vom Himmel und sprach: Abraham! Abraham! Er antwortete: Hier bin ich.
Er sprach: Lege deine Hand nicht an den Knaben und tu ihm nichts; denn nun wei&szlig; ich, da&szlig; du Gott fürchtest und hast deines einzigen Sohnes nicht verschont um meinetwillen.
Da hob Abraham seine Augen auf und sah einen Widder hinter sich in der Hecke mit seinen Hörnern hängen und ging hin und nahm den Widder und opferte ihn zum Brandopfer an seines Sohnes Statt.
Und Abraham nannte die Stätte "Der HERR sieht". Daher man noch heute sagt: Auf dem Berge, da der HERR sieht.
Und der Engel des HERRN rief Abraham abermals vom Himmel her
und sprach: Ich habe bei mir selbst geschworen, spricht der HERR: Weil du solches getan hast und hast deines einzigen Sohnes nicht verschont,
will ich dein Geschlecht segnen und mehren wie die Sterne am Himmel und wie den Sand am Ufer des Meeres, und deine Nachkommen sollen die Tore ihrer Feinde besitzen;
und durch dein Geschlecht sollen alle Völker auf Erden gesegnet werden, weil du meiner Stimme gehorcht hast.
So kehrte Abraham zurück zu seinen Knechten. Und sie machten sich auf und zogen miteinander nach Beerscheba, und Abrahm blieb daselbst.
[Note: Die Nachkommen Nahors]Nach diesen Geschichten begab sich's, da&szlig; Abraham angesagt wurde: Siehe, Milka hat auch Söhne geboren deinem Bruder Nahor,
nämlich Uz, den Erstgeborenen, und Bus, seinen Bruder, und Kemuël, von dem die Aramäer herkommen,
und Kesed und Haso und Pildasch und Jidlaf und Betuël.
Betuël aber zeugte Rebekka. Diese acht gebar Milka dem Nahor, Abrahams Bruder.
Und seine Nebenfrau, mit Namen Rëuma, gebar auch, nämlich den Tebach, Gaham, Tahasch und Maacha. 
</P><hr><h3>23. Kapitel</h3><h3>Sara stirbt. Abraham erwirbt ein Erbbegräbnis</h3>
<p>Sara wurde hundertsiebenundzwanzig Jahre alt
und starb in Kirjat-Arba - das ist Hebron - im Lande Kanaan. Da kam Abraham, da&szlig; er sie beklagte und beweinte.
Danach stand er auf von seiner Toten und redete mit den Hetitern und sprach:
Ich bin ein Fremdling und Beisasse bei euch; gebt mir ein Erbbegräbnis bei euch, da&szlig; ich meine Tote hinaustrage und begrabe.
Da antworteten die Hetiter Abraham und sprachen zu ihm:
Höre uns, lieber Herr! Du bist ein Fürst Gottes unter uns. Begrabe deine Tote in einem unserer vornehmsten Gräber; kein Mensch unter uns wird dir wehren, da&szlig; du in seinem Grabe deine Tote begrabest.
Da stand Abraham auf und verneigte sich vor dem Volk des Landes, vor den Hetitern.
Und er redete mit ihnen und sprach: Gefällt es euch, da&szlig; ich meine Tote hinaustrage und begrabe, so höret mich und bittet für mich Efron, den Sohn Zohars,
da&szlig; er mir gebe seine Höhle in Machpela, die am Ende seines Ackers liegt; er gebe sie mir um Geld, soviel sie wert ist, zum Erbbegräbnis unter euch.
Efron aber sa&szlig; unter den Hetitern. Da antwortete Efron, der Hetiter, dem Abraham vor den Ohren der Hetiter, vor allen, die beim Tor seiner Stadt versammelt waren, und sprach:
Nein, mein Herr, sondern höre mir zu! Ich schenke dir den Acker und die Höhle darin und übergebe dir's vor den Augen der Söhne meines Volks, um deine Tote dort zu begraben.
Da verneigte sich Abraham vor dem Volk des Landes
und redete mit Efron, so da&szlig; das Volk des Landes es hörte, und sprach: Willst du ihn mir lassen, so bitte ich, nimm von mir das Geld für den Acker, das ich dir gebe, so will ich meine Tote dort begraben.
Efron antwortete Abraham und sprach zu ihm:
Mein Herr, höre mich doch! Das Feld ist vierhundert Lot Silber wert; was ist das aber zwischen mir und dir? Begrabe nur deine Tote!
Abraham gehorchte Efron und wog ihm die Summe dar, die er genannt hatte vor den Ohren der Hetiter, vierhundert Lot Silber nach dem Gewicht, das im Kauf gang und gäbe war.
So wurde Efrons Acker in Machpela östlich von Mamre Abraham zum Eigentum bestätigt, mit der Höhle darin und mit allen Bäumen auf dem Acker umher,
vor den Augen der Hetiter und aller, die beim Tor seiner Stadt versammelt waren.
Danach begrub Abraham Sara, seine Frau, in der Höhle des Ackers in Machpela östlich von Mamre, das ist Hebron, im Lande Kanaan.
So wurden Abraham der Acker und die Höhle darin zum Erbbegräbnis bestätigt von den Hetitern. 
</P><hr><h3>24. Kapitel</h3><h3>Rebekka wird Isaaks Frau</h3>
<p>Abraham war alt und hochbetagt, und der HERR hatte ihn gesegnet allenthalben.
Und er sprach zu dem ältesten Knecht seines Hauses, der allen seinen Gütern vorstand: Lege deine Hand unter meine Hüfte
und schwöre mir bei dem HERRN, dem Gott des Himmels und der Erde, da&szlig; du meinem Sohn keine Frau nehmest von den Töchtern der Kanaaniter, unter denen ich wohne,
sondern da&szlig; du ziehest in mein Vaterland und zu meiner Verwandtschaft und nehmest meinem Sohn Isaak dort eine Frau.
Der Knecht sprach: Wie, wenn das Mädchen mir nicht folgen wollte in dies Land, soll ich dann deinen Sohn zurückbringen in jenes Land, von dem du ausgezogen bist?
Abraham sprach zu ihm: Davor hüte dich, da&szlig; du meinen Sohn wieder dahin bringest!
Der HERR, der Gott des Himmels, der mich von meines Vaters Hause genommen hat und von meiner Heimat, der mir zugesagt und mir auch geschworen hat: Dies Land will ich deinen Nachkommen geben -, der wird seinen Engel vor dir her senden, da&szlig; du meinem Sohn dort eine Frau nehmest.
Wenn aber das Mädchen dir nicht folgen will, so bist du dieses Eides ledig. Nur bringe meinen Sohn nicht wieder dorthin!
Da legte der Knecht seine Hand unter die Hüfte Abrahams, seines Herrn, und schwor es ihm.
So nahm der Knecht zehn Kamele von den Kamelen seines Herrn und zog hin und hatte mit sich allerlei Güter seines Herrn und machte sich auf und zog nach Mesopotamien, zu der Stadt Nahors.
Da lie&szlig; er die Kamele sich lagern drau&szlig;en vor der Stadt bei dem Wasserbrunnen des Abends um die Zeit, da die Frauen pflegten herauszugehen und Wasser zu schöpfen.
Und er sprach: HERR, du Gott Abrahams, meines Herrn, la&szlig; es mir heute gelingen und tu Barmherzigkeit an Abraham, meinem Herrn!
Siehe, ich stehe hier bei dem Wasserbrunnen, und die Töchter der Leute in dieser Stadt werden herauskommen, um Wasser zu schöpfen.
Wenn nun ein Mädchen kommt, zu dem ich spreche: Neige deinen Krug und la&szlig; mich trinken, und es sprechen wird: Trinke, ich will deine Kamele auch tränken -, das sei die, die du deinem Diener Isaak beschert hast, und daran werde ich erkennen, da&szlig; du Barmherzigkeit an meinem Herrn getan hast.
Und ehe er ausgeredet hatte, siehe, da kam heraus Rebekka, die Tochter Betuëls, der ein Sohn der Milka war, die die Frau Nahors, des Bruders Abrahams, war, und trug einen Krug auf ihrer Schulter.
Und das Mädchen war sehr schön von Angesicht, eine Jungfrau, die noch von keinem Manne wu&szlig;te. Die stieg hinab zum Brunnen und füllte den Krug und stieg herauf.
Da lief ihr der Knecht entgegen und sprach: La&szlig; mich ein wenig Wasser aus deinem Kruge trinken.
Und sie sprach: Trinke, mein Herr! Und eilends lie&szlig; sie den Krug hernieder auf ihre Hand und gab ihm zu trinken.
Und als sie ihm zu trinken gegeben hatte, sprach sie: Ich will deinen Kamelen auch schöpfen, bis sie alle genug getrunken haben.
Und eilte und go&szlig; den Krug aus in die Tränke und lief abermals zum Brunnen, um zu schöpfen, und schöpfte allen seinen Kamelen.
Der Mann aber betrachtete sie und schwieg still, bis er erkannt hätte, ob der HERR zu seiner Reise Gnade gegeben hätte oder nicht.
Als nun die Kamele alle getrunken hatten, nahm er einen goldenen Stirnreif, sechs Gramm schwer, und zwei goldene Armreifen für ihre Hände, hundertundzwanzig Gramm schwer,
und sprach: Wessen Tochter bist du? Das sage mir doch! Haben wir auch Raum in deines Vaters Hause, um zu herbergen?
Sie sprach zu ihm: Ich bin die Tochter Betuëls, des Sohnes der Milka, den sie dem Nahor geboren hat.
Und sagte weiter zu ihm: Es ist auch viel Stroh und Futter bei uns und Raum genug, um zu herbergen.
Da neigte sich der Mann und betete den HERRN an
und sprach: Gelobt sei der HERR, der Gott Abrahams, meines Herrn, der seine Barmherzigkeit und seine Treue von meinem Herrn nicht hat weichen lassen; denn der HERR hat mich geradewegs geführt zum Hause des Bruders meines Herrn.
Und das Mädchen lief und sagte dies alles in ihrer Mutter Hause.
Und Rebekka hatte einen Bruder, der hie&szlig; Laban; und Laban lief zu dem Mann drau&szlig;en bei dem Brunnen.
Denn als er den Stirnreif und die Armreifen an den Händen seiner Schwester gesehen hatte und die Worte Rebekkas, seiner Schwester, gehört hatte: So hat mir der Mann gesagt -, da kam er zu dem Mann, und siehe, er stand bei den Kamelen am Brunnen.
Und er sprach: Komm herein, du Gesegneter des HERRN! Warum stehst du drau&szlig;en? Ich habe das Haus bereitet und für die Kamele auch Raum gemacht.
Da führte er den Mann ins Haus und zäumte die Kamele ab und gab ihnen Stroh und Futter, dazu auch Wasser, zu waschen seine Fü&szlig;e und die Fü&szlig;e der Männer, die mit ihm waren.
Und man setzte ihm Essen vor. Er sprach aber: Ich will nicht essen, bis ich zuvor meine Sache vorgebracht habe. Sie antworteten: Sage an!
Er sprach: Ich bin Abrahams Knecht.
Und der HERR hat meinen Herrn reich gesegnet, da&szlig; er gro&szlig; geworden ist, und hat ihm Schafe und Rinder, Silber und Gold, Knechte und Mägde, Kamele und Esel gegeben.
Dazu hat Sara, die Frau meines Herrn, einen Sohn geboren meinem Herrn in seinem Alter; dem hat er alles gegeben, was er hat.
Und mein Herr hat einen Eid von mir genommen und gesagt: Du sollst meinem Sohn keine Frau nehmen von den Töchtern der Kanaaniter, in deren Land ich wohne,
sondern zieh hin zu meines Vaters Hause und zu meinem Geschlecht; dort nimm meinem Sohn eine Frau.
Ich sprach aber zu meinem Herrn: Wie, wenn mir das Mädchen nicht folgen will?
Da sprach er zu mir: Der HERR, vor dem ich wandle, wird seinen Engel mit dir senden und Gnade zu deiner Reise geben, da&szlig; du meinem Sohn eine Frau nehmest von meiner Verwandtschaft und meines Vaters Hause.
Dann sollst du deines Eides ledig sein: Wenn du zu meiner Verwandtschaft kommst und sie geben sie dir nicht, so bist du deines Eides ledig.
So kam ich heute zum Brunnen und sprach: HERR, du Gott Abrahams, meines Herrn, hast du Gnade zu meiner Reise gegeben, auf der ich bin,
siehe, so stehe ich hier bei dem Wasserbrunnen. Wenn nun ein Mädchen herauskommt, um zu schöpfen, und ich zu ihr spreche: Gib mir ein wenig Wasser zu trinken aus deinem Krug,
und sie sagen wird: Trinke du, ich will deinen Kamelen auch schöpfen -, das sei die Frau, die der HERR dem Sohn meines Herrn beschert hat.
Ehe ich nun diese Worte ausgeredet hatte in meinem Herzen, siehe, da kommt Rebekka heraus mit einem Krug auf ihrer Schulter und geht hinab zum Brunnen und schöpft. Da sprach ich zu ihr: Gib mir zu trinken.
Und sie nahm eilends den Krug von ihrer Schulter und sprach: Trinke, und deine Kamele will ich auch tränken. Da trank ich, und sie tränkte die Kamele auch.
Und ich fragte sie und sprach: Wessen Tochter bist du? Sie antwortete: Ich bin die Tochter Betuëls, des Sohnes Nahors, den ihm Milka geboren hat. Da legte ich einen Reif an ihre Stirn und Armreifen an ihre Hände.
und neigte mich und betete den HERRN an und lobte den HERRN, den Gott Abrahams, meines Herrn, der mich den rechten Weg geführt hat, da&szlig; ich für seinen Sohn die Tochter des Bruders meines Herrn nehme.
Seid ihr nun die, die an meinem Herrn Freundschaft und Treue beweisen wollen, so sagt mir's; wenn nicht, so sagt mir's auch, da&szlig; ich mich wende zur Rechten oder zur Linken.
Da antworteten Laban und Betuël und sprachen: Das kommt vom HERRN, darum können wir nichts dazu sagen, weder Böses noch Gutes.
Da ist Rebekka vor dir, nimm sie und zieh hin, da&szlig; sie die Frau sei des Sohnes deines Herrn, wie der HERR geredet hat.
Als Abrahams Knecht diese Worte hörte, neigte er sich vor dem HERRN bis zur Erde.
Danach zog er hervor silberne und goldene Kleinode und Kleider und gab sie Rebekka; auch ihrem Bruder und der Mutter gab er kostbare Geschenke.
Dann a&szlig; und trank er samt den Männern, die mit ihm waren, und sie blieben über Nacht allda. Am Morgen aber standen sie auf, und er sprach: La&szlig;t mich ziehen zu meinem Herrn.
Aber ihr Bruder und ihre Mutter sprachen: La&szlig; doch das Mädchen noch einige Tage bei uns bleiben; danach sollst du ziehen.
Da sprach er zu ihnen: Haltet mich nicht auf, denn der HERR hat Gnade zu meiner Reise gegeben. La&szlig;t mich, da&szlig; ich zu meinem Herrn ziehe.
Da sprachen sie: Wir wollen das Mädchen rufen und fragen, was sie dazu sagt.
Und sie riefen Rebekka und sprachen zu ihr: Willst du mit diesem Manne ziehen? Sie antwortete: Ja, ich will es.
Da lie&szlig;en sie Rebekka, ihre Schwester, ziehen mit ihrer Amme, samt Abrahams Knecht und seinen Leuten.
Und sie segneten Rebekka und sprachen zu ihr: Du, unsere Schwester, wachse zu vieltausendmal tausend, und dein Geschlecht besitze die Tore seiner Feinde.
So machte sich Rebekka auf mit ihren Mägden, und sie setzten sich auf die Kamele und zogen dem Manne nach. Und der Knecht nahm Rebekka und zog von dannen.
Isaak aber war gezogen zum "Brunnen des Lebendigen, der mich sieht" und wohnte im Südlande.
Und er war ausgegangen, um zu beten auf dem Felde gegen Abend, und hob seine Augen auf und sah, da&szlig; Kamele daherkamen.
Und Rebekka hob ihre Augen auf und sah Isaak; da stieg sie eilends vom Kamel
und sprach zu dem Knecht: Wer ist der Mann, der uns entgegenkommt auf dem Felde? Der Knecht sprach: Das ist mein Herr. Da nahm sie den Schleier und verhüllte sich.
Und der Knecht erzählte Isaak alles, was er ausgerichtet hatte.
Da führte sie Isaak in das Zelt seiner Mutter Sara und nahm die Rebekka, und sie wurde seine Frau, und er gewann sie lieb. Also wurde Isaak getröstet über seine Mutter. 
</P><hr><h3>25. Kapitel</h3><h3>Abrahams zweite Ehe. Sein Tod und Begräbnis</h3>
<p>Abraham nahm wieder eine Frau, die hie&szlig; Ketura.
Die gebar ihm Simran und Jokschan, Medan und Midian, Jischbak und Schuach.
Jokschan aber zeugte Saba und Dedan. Die Söhne Dedans aber waren: die Aschuriter, die Letuschiter und die Lëummiter.
Die Söhne Midians waren: Efa, Efer, Henoch, Abida und Eldaa. Diese alle sind Söhne der Ketura.
Und Abraham gab all sein Gut Isaak.
Aber den Söhnen, die er von den Nebenfrauen hatte, gab er Geschenke und schickte sie noch zu seinen Lebzeiten fort von seinem Sohn Isaak, nach Osten hin ins Morgenland.
Das ist aber Abrahams Alter, das er erreicht hat: hundertundfünfundsiebzig Jahre.
Und Abraham verschied und starb in einem guten Alter, als er alt und lebenssatt war, und wurde zu seinen Vätern versammelt.
Und es begruben ihn seine Söhne Isaak und Ismael in der Höhle von Machpela auf dem Acker Efrons, des Sohnes Zohars, des Hetiters, die da liegt östlich von Mamre
auf dem Felde, das Abraham von den Hetitern gekauft hatte. Da ist Abraham begraben mit Sara, seiner Frau.
Und nach dem Tode Abrahams segnete Gott Isaak, seinen Sohn. Und er wohnte bei dem "Brunnen des Lebendigen, der mich sieht".
[Note: Ismaels Nachkommen]Dies ist das Geschlecht Ismaels, des Sohnes Abrahams, den ihm Hagar gebar, die Magd Saras aus Ägypten;
und dies sind die Namen der Söhne Ismaels, nach denen ihre Geschlechter genannt sind: der erstgeborene Sohn Ismales Nebajot, dann Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
Mischma, Duma, Massa,
Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Nafisch und Kedma.
Das sind die Söhne Ismaels mit ihren Namen nach ihren Gehöften und Zeltdörfern, zwölf Fürsten nach ihren Stämmen.
- Und das ist das Alter Ismaels: hundertundsiebenunddrei&szlig;ig Jahre. Und er verschied und starb und wurde versammelt zu seinen Vätern. -
Und sie wohnten von Hawila an bis nach Schur östlich von Ägypten nach Assyrien hin. So lie&szlig; er sich nieder all seinen Brüdern zum Trotz.
[Note: Esaus und Jakobs Geburt]Dies ist das Geschlecht Isaaks, des Sohnes Abrahams: Abraham zeugte Isaak.
Isaak aber war vierzig Jahre alt, als er Rebekka zur Frau nahm, die Tochter Betuëls, des Aramäers aus Mesopotamien, die Schwester des Aramäers Laban.
Isaak aber bat den HERRN für seine Frau, denn sie war unfruchtbar. Und der HERR lie&szlig; sich erbitten, und Rebekka, seine Frau, ward schwanger.
Und die Kinder stie&szlig;en sich miteinander in ihrem Leib. Da sprach sie: Wenn mir's so gehen soll, warum bin ich schwanger geworden? Und sie ging hin, den HERRN zu befragen.
Und der HERR sprach zu ihr: Zwei Völker sind in deinem Leibe, und zweierlei Volk wird sich scheiden aus deinem Leibe; und ein Volk wird dem andern überlegen sein, und der Ältere wird dem Jüngeren dienen.
Als nun die Zeit kam, da&szlig; sie gebären sollte, siehe, da waren Zwillinge in ihrem Leibe.
Der erste, der herauskam, war rötlich, ganz rauh wie ein Fell, und sie nannten ihn Esau.
Danach kam heraus sein Bruder, der hielt mit seiner Hand die Ferse des Esau, und sie nannten ihn Jakob. Sechzig Jahre alt war Isaak, als sie geboren wurden.
Und als nun die Knaben gro&szlig; wurden, wurde Esau ein Jäger und streifte auf dem Felde umher, Jakob aber ein gesitteter Mann und blieb bei den Zelten.
Und Isaak hatte Esau lieb und a&szlig; gern von seinem Wildbret; Rebekka aber hatte Jakob lieb.
[Note: Esau verkauft sein Erstgeburtsrecht]Und Jakob kochte ein Gericht. Da kam Esau vom Feld und war müde
und sprach zu Jakob: La&szlig; mich essen das rote Gericht; denn ich bin müde. Daher hei&szlig;t er Edom.
Aber Jakob sprach: Verkaufe mir heute deine Erstgeburt.
Esau antwortete: Siehe, ich mu&szlig; doch sterben; was soll mir da die Erstgeburt?
Jakob sprach: So schwöre mir zuvor. Und er schwor ihm und verkaufte so Jakob seine Erstgeburt.
Da gab ihm Jakob Brot und das Linsengericht, und er a&szlig; und trank und stand auf und ging davon. So verachtete Esau seine Erstgeburt. 
</P><hr><h3>26. Kapitel</h3><h3>Erneute Verhei&szlig;ung. Isaak und Rebekka in Gerar</h3><h3>(vgl. Kap 12,10-20; 20,1-18)</h3>
<p>Es kam aber eine Hungersnot ins Land nach der früheren, die zu Abrahams Zeiten war. Und Isaak zog zu Abimelech, dem König der Philister, nach Gerar.
Da erschien ihm der HERR und sprach: Zieh nicht hinab nach Ägypten, sondern bleibe in dem Lande, das ich dir sage.
Bleibe als Fremdling in diesem Lande, und ich will mit dir sein und dich segnen; denn dir und deinen Nachkommen will ich alle diese Länder geben und will meinen Eid wahr machen, den ich deinem Vater Abraham geschworen habe,
und will deine Nachkommen mehren wie die Sterne am Himmel und will deinen Nachkommen alle diese Länder geben. Und durch dein Geschlecht sollen alle Völker auf Erden gesegnet werden,
weil Abraham meiner Stimme gehorsam gewesen ist und gehalten hat meine Rechte, meine Gebote, meine Weisungen und mein Gesetz.
So wohnte Isaak zu Gerar.
Und wenn die Leute am Ort fragten nach seiner Frau, so sprach er: Sie ist meine Schwester; denn er fürchtete sich zu sagen: Sie ist meine Frau. Er dachte nämlich: Sie könnten mich töten um Rebekkas willen, denn sie ist schön von Gestalt.
Als er nun eine Zeit lang da war, sah Abimelech, der König der Philister, durchs Fenster und wurde gewahr, da&szlig; Isaak scherzte mit Rebekka, seiner Frau.
Da rief Abimelech den Isaak und sprach: Siehe, es ist deine Frau. Wie hast du dann gesagt: sie ist meine Schwester? Isaak antwortete ihm: Ich dachte, ich würde vielleicht sterben müssen um ihretwillen.
Abimelech sprach: Warum hast du uns das angetan? Es wäre leicht geschehen, da&szlig; jemand vom Volk sich zu deiner Frau gelegt hätte, und du hättest so eine Schuld auf uns gebracht.
Da gebot Abimelech allem Volk und sprach: Wer diesen Mann oder seine Frau antastet, der soll des Todes sterben.
[Note: Isaaks Streit mit den Philistern. Sein Bund mit Abimelech]Und Isaak säte in dem Lande und erntete in jenem Jahre hundertfältig; denn der HERR segnete ihn.
Und er wurde ein reicher Mann und nahm immer mehr zu, bis er sehr reich wurde,
so da&szlig; er viel Gut hatte an kleinem und gro&szlig;em Vieh und ein gro&szlig;es Gesinde. Darum beneideten ihn die Philister.
Nun hatten sie aber alle Brunnen verstopft, die seines Vaters Knechte gegraben hatten zur Zeit Abrahams, seines Vaters, und hatten sie mit Erde gefüllt.
Und Abimelech sprach zu ihm: Zieh von uns, denn du bist uns zu mächtig geworden.
Da zog Isaak von dannen und schlug seine Zelte auf im Grunde von Gerar und wohnte da
und lie&szlig; die Wasserbrunnen wieder aufgraben, die sie zur Zeit Abrahams, seines Vaters, gegraben hatten und die die Philister verstopft hatten nach Abrahams Tod, und nannte sie mit denselben Namen, mit denen sein Vater sie genannt hatte.
Auch gruben Isaaks Knechte im Grunde und fanden dort eine Quelle lebendigen Wassers.
Aber die Hirten von Gerar zankten mit den Hirten Isaaks und sprachen: Das Wasser ist unser. Da nannte er den Brunnen "Zank", weil sie mit ihm da gezankt hatten.
Da gruben sie einen andern Brunnen. Darüber stritten sie auch, darum nannte er ihn "Streit".
Da zog er weiter und grub noch einen andern Brunnen. Darüber zankten sie sich nicht, darum nannte er ihn "Weiter Raum" und sprach: Nun hat uns der HERR Raum gemacht, und wir können wachsen im Lande.
Danach zog er von dannen nach Beerscheba.
Und der HERR erschien ihm in derselben Nacht und sprach: Ich bin der Gott deines Vaters Abraham. Fürchte dich nicht, denn ich bin mit dir und will dich segnen und deine Nachkommen mehren um meines Knechtes Abraham willen.
Dann baute er dort einen Altar und rief den Namen des HERRN an und schlug dort sein Zelt auf, und seine Knechte gruben dort einen Brunnen.
Und Abimelech ging zu ihm von Gerar mit Ahusat, seinem Freund, und Pichol, seinem Feldhauptmann.
Aber Isaak sprach zu ihnen: Warum kommt ihr zu mir? Hasset ihr mich doch und habt mich von euch getrieben.
Sie sprachen: Wir sehen mit sehenden Augen, da&szlig; der HERR mit dir ist. Darum sprachen wir: Es soll ein Eid zwischen uns und dir sein, und wir wollen einen Bund mit dir schlie&szlig;en,
da&szlig; du uns keinen Schaden tust, gleichwie wir dich nicht angetastet haben und dir nur alles Gute getan und dich mit Frieden haben ziehen lassen. Du bist ja doch der Gesegnete des HERRN.
Da machte er ihnen ein Mahl, und sie a&szlig;en und tranken.
Und früh am Morgen standen sie auf, und einer schwor dem andern. Und Isaak lie&szlig; sie gehen, und sie zogen von ihm mit Frieden.
Am selben Tage kamen Isaaks Knechte und sagten ihm von dem Brunnen, den sie gegraben hatten, und sprachen zu ihm: Wir haben Wasser gefunden.
Und er nannte ihn "Schwur"; daher hei&szlig;t die Stadt Beerscheba* bis auf den heutigen Tag. *d. . Schwurbrunnen.
[Note: Esaus Frauen]Als Esau vierzig Jahre alt war, nahm er zur Frau Jehudit, die Tochter Beeris, des Hetiters, und Basemat, die Tochter Elons, des Hetiters.
Die machten Isaak und Rebekka lauter Herzeleid. 
</P><hr><h3>27. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakob gewinnt mit List den Erstgeburtssegen</h3>
<p>Und es begab sich, als Isaak alt geworden war und seine Augen zu schwach zum Sehen wurden, rief er Esau, seinen älteren Sohn, und sprach zu ihm: Mein Sohn! Er aber antwortete ihm: Hier bin ich.
Und er sprach: Siehe, ich bin alt geworden und wei&szlig; nicht, wann ich sterben werde.
So nimm nun dein Gerät, Köcher und Bogen, und geh aufs Feld und jage mir ein Wildbret
und mach mir ein Essen, wie ich's gern habe, und bring mir's herein, da&szlig; ich esse, auf da&szlig; dich meine Seele segne, ehe ich sterbe.
Rebekka aber hörte diese Worte, die Isaak zu seinem Sohn Esau sagte. Und Esau ging hin aufs Feld, da&szlig; er ein Wildbret jagte und heimbrächte.
Da sprach Rebekka zu Jakob, ihrem Sohn: Siehe, ich habe deinen Vater mit Esau, deinem Bruder, reden hören:
Bringe mir ein Wildbret und mach mir ein Essen, da&szlig; ich esse und dich segne vor dem HERRN, ehe ich sterbe.
So höre nun, mein Sohn, auf mich und tu, was ich dich hei&szlig;e.
Geh hin zu der Herde und hole mir zwei gute Böcklein, da&szlig; ich deinem Vater ein Essen davon mache, wie er's gerne hat.
Das sollst du deinem Vater hineintragen, da&szlig; er esse, auf da&szlig; er dich segne vor seinem Tod.
Jakob aber sprach zu seiner Mutter Rebekka: Siehe, mein Bruder Esau ist rauh, doch ich bin glatt;
so könnte vielleicht mein Vater mich betasten, und ich würde vor ihm dastehen, als ob ich ihn betrügen wollte, und brächte über mich einen Fluch und nicht einen Segen.
Da sprach seine Mutter zu ihm: Der Fluch sei auf mir, mein Sohn; gehorche nur meinen Worten, geh und hole mir.
Da ging er hin und holte und brachte es seiner Mutter. Da machte seine Mutter ein Essen, wie es sein Vater gerne hatte,
und nahm Esaus, ihres älteren Sohnes, Feierkleider, die sie bei sich im Hause hatte, und zog sie Jakob an, ihrem jüngeren Sohn.
Aber die Felle von den Böcklein tat sie ihm um seine Hände und wo er glatt war am Halse.
Und so gab sie das Essen mit dem Brot, wie sie es gemacht hatte, in die Hand ihres Sohnes Jakob.
Und er ging hinein zu seinem Vater und sprach: Mein Vater! Er antwortete: Hier bin ich. Wer bist du, mein Sohn?
Jakob sprach zu seinem Vater: Ich bin Esau, dein erstgeborener Sohn; ich habe getan, wie du mir gesagt hast. Komm nun, setze dich und i&szlig; von meinem Wildbret, auf da&szlig; mich deine Seele segne.
Isaak aber sprach zu seinem Sohn: Wie hast du so bald gefunden, mein Sohn? Er antwortete: Der HERR, dein Gott, bescherte mir's.
Da sprach Isaak zu Jakob: Tritt herzu, mein Sohn, da&szlig; ich dich betaste, ob du mein Sohn Esau bist oder nicht.
So trat Jakob zu seinem Vater Isaak. Und als er ihn betastet hatte, sprach er: Die Stimme ist Jakobs Stimme, aber die Hände sind Esaus Hände.
Und er erkannte ihn nicht; denn seine Hände waren rauh wie Esaus, seines Bruders, Hände. Und er segnete ihn
und sprach: Bist du mein Sohn Esau? Er antwortete: Ja, ich bin's.
Da sprach er: So bringe mir her, mein Sohn, zu essen von deinem Wildbret, da&szlig; dich meine Seele segne. Da brachte er's ihm, und er a&szlig;; und er trug ihm auch Wein hinein, und er trank.
Und Isaak, sein Vater, sprach zu ihm: Komm her und küsse mich, mein Sohn!
Er trat hinzu und kü&szlig;te ihn. Da roch er den Geruch seiner Kleider und segnete ihn und sprach: Siehe, der Geruch meines Sohnes ist wie der Geruch des Feldes, das der HERR gesegnet hat.
Gott gebe dir vom Tau des Himmels und von der Fettigkeit der Erde und Korn und Wein die Fülle.
Völker sollen dir dienen, und Stämme sollen dir zu Fü&szlig;en fallen. Sei ein Herr über deine Brüder, und deiner Mutter Söhne sollen dir zu Fü&szlig;en fallen. Verflucht sei, wer dir flucht; gesegnet sei, wer dich segnet!
Als nun Isaak den Segen über Jakob vollendet hatte und Jakob kaum hinausgegangen war von seinem Vater Isaak, da kam Esau, sein Bruder, von seiner Jagd
und machte auch ein Essen und trug's hinein zu seinem Vater und sprach zu ihm: Richte dich auf, mein Vater, und i&szlig; von dem Wildbret deines Sohnes, da&szlig; mich deine Seele segne.
Da antwortete ihm Isaak, sein Vater: Wer bist du? Er sprach: Ich bin Esau, dein erstgeborener Sohn.
Da entsetzte sich Isaak über die Ma&szlig;en sehr und sprach: Wer? Wo ist denn der Jäger, der mir gebracht hat, und ich habe von allem gegessen, ehe du kamst, und hab ihn gesegnet? Er wird auch gesegnet bleiben.
Als Esau diese Worte seines Vaters hörte, schrie er laut und wurde über die Ma&szlig;en sehr betrübt und sprach zu seinem Vater: Segne mich auch, mein Vater!a
Er aber sprach: Dein Bruder ist gekommen mit List und hat deinen Segen weggenommen.
Da sprach er: Er hei&szlig;t mit Recht Jakob*, denn er hat mich nun zweimal überlistet. Meine Erstgeburt hat er genommen, und siehe, nun nimmt er auch meinen Segen. Und er sprach: Hast du mir denn keinen Segen vorbehalten? *d. . der Hinterlistige
Isaak antwortete und sprach zu ihm: Ich habe ihn zum Herrn über dich gesetzt, und alle seine Brüder hab ich ihm zu Knechten gemacht, mit Korn und Wein hab ich ihn versehen; was soll ich nun dir noch tun, mein Sohn?
Esau sprach zu seinem Vater: Hast du denn nur einen Segen, mein Vater? Segne mich auch, mein Vater! Und er erhob seine Stimme und weinte.
Da antwortete Isaak, sein Vater, und sprach zu ihm: Siehe, du wirst wohnen ohne Fettigkeit der Erde und ohne Tau des Himmels von oben her.
Von deinem Schwerte wirst du dich nähren, und deinem Bruder sollst du dienen. Aber es wird geschehen, da&szlig; du einmal sein Joch von deinem Halse rei&szlig;en wirst.
[Note: Jakobs Flucht nach Haran]Und Esau war Jakob gram um des Segens willen, mit dem ihn sein Vater gesegnet hatte, und sprach in seinem Herzen: Es wird die Zeit bald kommen, da&szlig; man um meinen Vater Leid tragen mu&szlig;; dann will ich meinen Bruder Jakob umbringen.
Da wurden Rebekka angesagt diese Worte ihres älteren Sohnes Esau. Und sie schickte hin und lie&szlig; Jakob, ihren jüngeren Sohn, rufen und sprach zu ihm: Siehe, dein Bruder Esau droht dir, da&szlig; er dich umbringen will.
Und nun höre auf mich, mein Sohn: Mach dich auf und flieh zu meinem Bruder Laban nach Haran
und bleib eine Weile bei ihm, bis sich der Grimm deines Bruders legt
und bis sein Zorn wider dich sich von dir wendet und er vergi&szlig;t, was du ihm getan hast; dann will ich schicken und dich von dort holen lassen. Warum sollte ich euer beider beraubt werden auf einen Tag?
Und Rebekka sprach zu Isaak: Mich verdrie&szlig;t zu leben, wegen der Hetiterinnen. Wenn Jakob eine Frau nimmt von den Hetiterinnen wie diese, eine von den Töchtern des Landes, was soll mir das Leben?a 
</P><hr><h3>28. Kapitel</h3>
<p>Da rief Isaak seinen Sohn Jakob und segnete ihn und gebot ihm und sprach zu ihm: Nimm dir nicht eine Frau von den Töchtern Kanaans,
sondern mach dich auf und zieh nach Mesopotamien zum Hause Betuëls, des Vaters deiner Mutter, und nimm dir dort eine Frau von den Töchtern Labans, des Bruders deiner Mutter.
Und der allmächtige Gott segne dich und mache dich fruchtbar und mehre dich, da&szlig; du werdest ein Haufe von Völkern,
und gebe dir den Segen Abrahams, dir und deinen Nachkommen mit dir, da&szlig; du besitzest das Land, darin du jetzt ein Fremdling bist, das Gott dem Abraham gegeben hat.
So entlie&szlig; Isaak den Jakob, da&szlig; er nach Mesopotamien zog zu Laban, dem Sohn des Aramäers Betuël, dem Bruder Rebekkas, Jakobs und Esaus Mutter.
Nun sah Esau, da&szlig; Isaak Jakob gesegnet und nach Mesopotamien entlassen hatte, um sich dort eine Frau zu nehmen; er hatte ihn nämlich gesegnet und ihm geboten: Du sollst dir keine Frau nehmen von den Töchtern Kanaans.
Auch sah Esau, da&szlig; Jakob seinem Vater und seiner Mutter gehorchte und nach Mesopotamien zog
und da&szlig; Isaak, sein Vater, die Töchter Kanaans nicht gerne sah.
Da ging er hin zu Ismael und nahm zu den Frauen, die er bereits hatte, Mahalat, die Tochter Ismaels, des Sohnes Abrahams, die Schwester Nebajots, zur Frau.
[Note: Jakob schaut die Himmelsleiter]Aber Jakob zog aus von Beerscheba und machte sich auf den Weg nach Haran
und kam an eine Stätte, da blieb er über Nacht, denn die Sonne war untergegangen. Und er nahm einen Stein von der Stätte und legte ihn zu seinen Häupten und legte sich an der Stätte schlafen.
Und ihm träumte, und siehe, eine Leiter stand auf Erden, die rührte mit der Spitze an den Himmel, und siehe, die Engel Gottes stiegen daran auf und nieder.
Und der HERR stand oben darauf und sprach: Ich bin der HERR, der Gott deines Vaters Abraham, und Isaaks Gott; das Land, darauf du liegst, will ich dir und deinen Nachkommen geben.
Und dein Geschlecht soll werden wie der Staub auf Erden, und du sollst ausgebreitet werden gegen Westen und Osten, Norden und Süden, und durch dich und deine Nachkommen sollen alle Geschlechter auf Erden gesegnet werden.
Und siehe, ich bin mit dir und will dich behüten, wo du hinziehst, und will dich wieder herbringen in dies Land. Denn ich will dich nicht verlassen, bis ich alles tue, was ich dir zugesagt habe.
Als nun Jakob von seinem Schlaf aufwachte, sprach er: Fürwahr, der HERR ist an dieser Stätte, und ich wu&szlig;te es nicht!
Und er fürchtete sich und sprach: Wie heilig ist diese Stätte! Hier ist nichts anderes als Gottes Haus, und hier ist die Pforte des Himmels.
Und Jakob stand früh am Morgen auf und nahm den Stein, den er zu seinen Häupten gelegt hatte, und richtete ihn auf zu einem Steinmal und go&szlig; Öl oben darauf
und nannte die Stätte Bethel*; vorher aber hie&szlig; die Stadt Lus. *d. . Haus Gottes.
Und Jakob tat ein Gelübde und sprach: Wird Gott mit mir sein und mich behüten auf dem Wege, den ich reise, und mir Brot zu essen geben und Kleider anzuziehen
und mich mit Frieden wieder heim zu meinem Vater bringen, so soll der HERR mein Gott sein.
Und dieser Stein, den ich aufgerichtet habe zu einem Steinmal, soll ein Gotteshaus werden; und von allem, was du mir gibst, will ich dir den Zehnten geben. 
</P><hr><h3>29. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakob dient um Lea und Rahel</h3>
<p>Da machte sich Jakob auf den Weg und ging in das Land, das im Osten liegt,
und sah sich um, und siehe, da war ein Brunnen auf dem Felde; und siehe, drei Herden Schafe lagen dabei, denn von dem Brunnen pflegten sie die Herden zu tränken. Und ein gro&szlig;er Stein lag vor dem Loch des Brunnens.
Und sie pflegten die Herden alle dort zu versammeln und den Stein von dem Brunnenloch zu wälzen und die Schafe zu tränken und taten alsdann den Stein wieder vor das Loch an seine Stelle.
Und Jakob sprach zu ihnen: Liebe Brüder, wo seid ihr her? Sie antworteten: Wir sind von Haran.
Er sprach zu ihnen: Kennt ihr auch Laban, den Sohn Nahors? Sie antworteten: Ja, wir kennen ihn.
Er sprach: Geht es ihm auch gut? Sie antworteten: Es geht ihm gut; und siehe, da kommt seine Tochter Rahel mit den Schafen.
Er sprach: Es ist noch hoher Tag und ist noch nicht Zeit, das Vieh einzutreiben; tränkt die Schafe und geht hin und weidet sie.
Sie antworteten: Wir können es nicht, bis alle Herden zusammengebracht sind und wir den Stein von des Brunnens Loch wälzen und dann die Schafe tränken.
Als er noch mit ihnen redete, kam Rahel mit den Schafen ihres Vaters, denn sie hütete die Schafe.
Als Jakob aber Rahel sah, die Tochter Labans, des Bruders seiner Mutter, und die Schafe Labans, des Bruders seiner Mutter, trat er hinzu und wälzte den Stein von dem Loch des Brunnens und tränkte die Schafe Labans, des Bruders seiner Mutter.
Und er kü&szlig;te Rahel und weinte laut
und sagte ihr, da&szlig; er ihres Vaters Verwandter wäre und Rebekkas Sohn. Da lief sie und sagte es ihrem Vater.
Als aber Laban hörte von Jakob, seiner Schwester Sohn, lief er ihm entgegen und herzte und kü&szlig;te ihn und führte ihn in sein Haus. Da erzählte er Laban alles, was sich begeben hatte.
Da sprach Laban zu ihm: Fürwahr, du bist von meinem Gebein und Fleisch. Und als er nun einen Monat lang bei ihm gewesen war,
sprach Laban zu Jakob: Zwar bist du mein Verwandter, aber solltest du mir darum umsonst dienen? Sage an, was soll dein Lohn sein?
Laban aber hatte zwei Töchter; die ältere hie&szlig; Lea, die jüngere Rahel.
Aber Leas Augen waren ohne Glanz, Rahel dagegen war schön von Gestalt und von Angesicht.
Und Jakob gewann Rahel lieb und sprach: Ich will dir sieben Jahre um Rahel, deine jüngere Tochter, dienen.
Laban antwortete: Es ist besser, ich gebe sie dir als einem andern; bleib bei mir.
So diente Jakob um Rahel sieben Jahre, und es kam ihm vor, als wären's einzelne Tage, so lieb hatte er sie.
Und Jakob sprach zu Laban: Gib mir nun meine Braut; denn die Zeit ist da, da&szlig; ich zu ihr gehe.
Da lud Laban alle Leute des Ortes ein und machte ein Hochzeitsmahl.
Am Abend aber nahm er seine Tochter Lea und brachte sie zu Jakob; und er ging zu ihr.
Und Laban gab seiner Tochter Lea seine Magd Silpa zur Leibmagd.
Am Morgen aber, siehe, da war es Lea. Und Jakob sprach zu Laban: Warum hast du mir das angetan? Habe ich dir nicht um Rahel gedient? Warum hast du mich denn betrogen?
Laban antwortete: Es ist nicht Sitte in unserm Lande, da&szlig; man die jüngere weggebe vor der älteren.
Halte mit dieser die Hochzeitswoche, so will ich dir die andere auch geben für den Dienst, den du bei mir noch weitere sieben Jahre leisten sollst.
Das tat Jakob und hielt die Hochzeitswoche. Da gab ihm Laban seine Tochter Rahel zur Frau.
Und er gab seiner Tochter Rahel seine Magd Bilha zur Leibmagd.
So ging Jakob auch zu Rahel ein und hatte Rahel lieber als Lea; und er diente bei ihm noch weitere sieben Jahre.
[Note: Jakobs Kinder]Als aber der HERR sah, da&szlig; Lea ungeliebt war, machte er sie fruchtbar; Rahel aber war unfruchtbar.
Und Lea ward schwanger und gebar einen Sohn; den nannte sie Ruben und sprach: Der HERR hat angesehen mein Elend; nun wird mich mein Mann liebhaben.
Und sie ward abermals schwanger und gebar einen Sohn und sprach: Der HERR hat gehört, da&szlig; ich ungeliebt bin, und hat mir diesen auch gegeben. Und nannte ihn Simeon.
Abermals ward sie schwanger und gebar einen Sohn und sprach: Nun wird mein Mann mir doch zugetan sein, denn ich habe ihm drei Söhne geboren. Darum nannte sie ihn Levi.
Zum viertenmal ward sie schwanger und gebar einen Sohn und sprach: Nun will ich dem HERRN danken. Darum nannte sie ihn Juda. Und sie hörte auf, Kinder zu gebären. 
</P><hr><h3>30. Kapitel</h3>
<p>Als Rahel sah, da&szlig; sie Jakob kein Kind gebar, beneidete sie ihre Schwester und sprach zu Jakob: Schaffe mir Kinder, wenn nicht, so sterbe ich.
Jakob aber wurde sehr zornig auf Rahel und sprach: Bin ich doch nicht Gott, der dir deines Leibes Frucht nicht geben will.
Sie aber sprach: Siehe, da ist meine Magd Bilha; geh zu ihr, da&szlig; sie auf meinem Scho&szlig; gebäre und ich doch durch sie zu Kindern komme.
So gab sie ihm Bilha, ihre Leibmagd, zur Frau, und Jakob ging zu ihr.
Und Bilha ward schwanger und gebar Jakob einen Sohn.
Da sprach Rahel: Gott hat mir Recht verschafft und mich erhört und mir einen Sohn gegeben. Darum nannte sie ihn Dan.
Abermals ward Bilha, Rahels Leibmagd, schwanger und gebar Jakob ihren zweiten Sohn.
Da sprach Rahel: Über alle Ma&szlig;en habe ich gekämpft mit meiner Schwester, und ich habe gesiegt. Und nannte ihn Naftali.
Als nun Lea sah, da&szlig; sie aufgehört hatte zu gebären, nahm sie ihre Leibmagd Silpa und gab sie Jakob zur Frau.
Und Silpa, Leas Leibmagd, gebar Jakob einen Sohn.
Da sprach Lea: Glück zu! Und nannte ihn Gad.
Danach gebar Silpa, Leas Leibmagd, Jakob ihren zweiten Sohn.
Da sprach Lea: Wohl mir, denn mich werden selig preisen die Töchter. Und nannte ihn Asser.
Ruben ging aus zur Zeit der Weizenernte und fand Liebesäpfel* auf dem Felde und brachte sie heim zu seiner Mutter Lea. Da sprach Rahel zu Lea: Gib mir von den Liebesäpfeln deines Sohnes. *Siehe Sach- und Worterklärungen.
Sie antwortete: Hast du nicht genug, da&szlig; du mir meinen Mann genommen hast, und willst auch die Liebesäpfel meines Sohnes nehmen? Rahel sprach: Wohlan, la&szlig; ihn diese Nacht bei dir schlafen für die Liebesäpfel deines Sohnes.
Als nun Jakob am Abend vom Felde kam, ging Lea hinaus ihm entgegen und sprach: Zu mir sollst du kommen, denn ich habe dich erkauft mit den Liebesäpfeln meines Sohnes. Und er schlief die Nacht bei ihr.
Und Gott erhörte Lea, und sie ward schwanger und gebar Jakob ihren fünften Sohn
und sprach: Gott hat mir gelohnt, da&szlig; ich meine Magd meinem Manne gegeben habe. Und nannte ihn Issachar.
Abermals ward Lea schwanger und gebar Jakob ihren sechsten Sohn
und sprach: Gott hat mich reich beschenkt; nun wird mein Mann doch bei mir bleiben; denn ich habe ihm sechs Söhne geboren. Und nannte ihn Sebulon.
Danach gebar sie eine Tochter, die nannte sie Dina.
Gott gedachte aber an Rahel und erhörte sie und machte sie fruchtbar.
Da ward sie schwanger und gebar einen Sohn und sprach: Gott hat meine Schmach von mir genommen;
und sie nannte ihn Josef und sprach: Der HERR wolle mir noch einen Sohn dazu geben!
Als nun Rahel den Josef geboren hatte, sprach Jakob zu Laban: La&szlig; mich ziehen und reisen an meinen Ort und in mein Land.
Gib mir meine Frauen und meine Kinder, um die ich dir gedient habe, da&szlig; ich ziehe; denn du wei&szlig;t, wie ich dir gedient habe.
Laban sprach zu ihm: La&szlig; mich Gnade vor deinen Augen finden. Ich spüre, da&szlig; mich der HERR segnet um deinetwillen.
Bestimme den Lohn, den ich dir geben soll.
Er aber sprach zu ihm: Du wei&szlig;t, wie ich dir gedient habe und was aus deinem Vieh geworden ist unter mir.
Du hattest wenig, ehe ich herkam; nun aber ist's geworden zu einer gro&szlig;en Menge, und der HERR hat dich gesegnet auf jedem meiner Schritte. Und nun, wann soll ich auch für mein Haus sorgen?
Er aber sprach: Was soll ich dir denn geben? Jakob sprach: Du sollst mir gar nichts geben; sondern wenn du mir tun willst, was ich dir sage, so will ich deine Schafe wieder weiden und hüten.
Ich will heute durch alle deine Herden gehen und aussondern alle gefleckten und bunten Schafe und alle schwarzen Schafe und die bunten und gefleckten Ziegen. Was nun bunt und gefleckt sein wird, das soll mein Lohn sein.
So wird meine Redlichkeit morgen für mich zeugen, wenn du kommst wegen meines Lohnes, den ich von dir nehmen soll: was nicht gefleckt oder bunt unter den Ziegen und nicht schwarz sein wird unter den Lämmern, das sei ein Diebstahl, wenn es sich bei mir findet.
Da sprach Laban: Wohlan, es sei, wie du gesagt hast.
Und er sonderte an jenem Tage aus die sprenkligen und bunten Böcke und alle gefleckten und bunten Ziegen, wo nur etwas Wei&szlig;es daran war, und alles, was schwarz war unter den Lämmern, und tat's unter die Hand seiner Söhne
und machte einen Raum, drei Tagereisen weit, zwischen sich und Jakob. Jakob aber weidete die übrigen Herden Labans.
Und Jakob nahm frische Stäbe von Pappeln, Mandelbäumen und Platanen und schälte wei&szlig;e Streifen daran aus, so da&szlig; an den Stäben das Wei&szlig;e blo&szlig; wurde,
und legte die Stäbe, die er geschält hatte, in die Tränkrinnen, wo die Herden hinkommen mu&szlig;ten zu trinken, da&szlig; sie da empfangen sollten, wenn sie zu trinken kämen.
So empfingen die Herden über den Stäben und brachten Sprenklige, Gefleckte und Bunte.
Da sonderte Jakob die Lämmer aus und machte sich eigene Herden; die tat er nicht zu den Herden Labans.
Wenn aber die Brunstzeit der kräftigen Tiere war, legte er die Stäbe in die Rinnen vor die Augen der Herde, da&szlig; sie über den Stäben empfingen.
Aber wenn die Tiere schwächlich waren, legte er sie nicht hinein. So wurden die schwächlichen Tiere dem Laban zuteil, aber die kräftigen dem Jakob.
Daher wurde der Mann über die Ma&szlig;en reich, so da&szlig; er viele Schafe, Mägde und Knechte, Kamele und Esel hatte. 
</P><hr><h3>31. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Flucht mit den Seinen. Sein Vertrag mit Laban</h3>
<p>Und es kamen vor ihn die Reden der Söhne Labans, da&szlig; sie sprachen: Jakob hat alles Gut unseres Vaters an sich gebracht, und nur von unseres Vaters Gut hat er solchen Reichtum zuwege gebracht.
Und Jakob sah an das Angesicht Labans, und siehe, er war gegen ihn nicht mehr wie zuvor.
Und der HERR sprach zu Jakob: Zieh wieder in deiner Väter Land und zu deiner Verwandtschaft; ich will mit dir sein.
Da sandte Jakob hin und lie&szlig; rufen Rahel und Lea aufs Feld zu seiner Herde
und sprach zu ihnen: Ich sehe an eures Vaters Angesicht, da&szlig; er gegen mich nicht ist wie zuvor; aber der Gott meines Vaters ist mit mir gewesen.
Und ihr wi&szlig;t, da&szlig; ich aus allen meinen Kräften eurem Vater gedient habe.
Und er hat mich getäuscht und zehnmal meinen Lohn verändert; aber Gott hat ihm nicht gestattet, da&szlig; er mir Schaden täte.
Wenn er sprach: Die Bunten sollen dein Lohn sein, so trug die ganze Herde Bunte. Wenn er aber sprach: Die Sprenkligen sollen dein Lohn sein, so trug die ganze Herde Sprenklige.
So hat Gott die Güter eures Vaters ihm entwunden und mir gegeben.
Denn wenn die Brunstzeit kam, hob ich meine Augen auf und sah im Traum, und siehe, die Böcke, die auf die Herde sprangen, waren sprenklig, gefleckt und bunt.
Und der Engel Gottes sprach zu mir im Traum: Jakob! Und ich antwortete: Hier bin ich.
Er aber sprach: Hebe deine Augen auf und sieh! Alle Böcke, die auf die Herde springen, sind sprenklig, gefleckt und bunt; denn ich habe alles gesehen, was Laban dir antut.
Ich bin der Gott, der dir zu Bethel erschienen ist, wo du den Stein gesalbt hast, und du hast mir daselbst ein Gelübde getan. Nun mach dich auf und zieh aus diesem Lande und kehre zurück in das Land deiner Verwandtschaft.
Da antworteten Rahel und Lea und sprachen zu ihm: Wir haben doch kein Teil noch Erbe mehr in unseres Vaters Hause.
Haben wir ihm doch gegolten wie die Fremden, denn er hat uns verkauft und unseren Kaufpreis verzehrt.
Fürwahr, der ganze Reichtum, den Gott unserm Vater entzogen hat, gehört uns und unsern Kindern. Alles nun, was Gott dir gesagt hat, das tu!
Da machte sich Jakob auf und lud seine Kinder und Frauen auf die Kamele
und führte weg all sein Vieh und alle seine Habe, die er in Mesopotamien erworben hatte, da&szlig; er käme zu Isaak, seinem Vater, ins Land Kanaan.
Laban aber war gegangen, seine Herde zu scheren. Und Rahel stahl ihres Vaters Hausgott.
Und Jakob täuschte Laban, den Aramäer, damit, da&szlig; er ihm nicht ansagte, da&szlig; er ziehen wollte.
So floh er mit allem, was sein war, machte sich auf und fuhr über den Euphrat und richtete seinen Weg nach dem Gebirge Gilead.
Am dritten Tage wurde Laban angesagt, da&szlig; Jakob geflohen wäre.
Und er nahm seine Brüder zu sich und jagte ihm nach, sieben Tagereisen weit, und ereilte ihn auf dem Gebirge Gilead.
Aber Gott kam zu Laban, dem Aramäer, im Traum des Nachts und sprach zu ihm: Hüte dich, mit Jakob anders zu reden als freundlich.
Und Laban holte Jakob ein. Jakob aber hatte sein Zelt aufgeschlagen auf dem Gebirge, und Laban mit seinen Brüdern schlug sein Zelt auch auf dem Gebirge Gilead auf.
Da sprach Laban zu Jakob: Was hast du getan, da&szlig; du mich getäuscht hast und hast meine Töchter entführt, als wenn sie im Krieg gefangen wären?
Warum bist du heimlich geflohen und hast mich hintergangen und hast mir's nicht angesagt, da&szlig; ich dich geleitet hätte mit Freuden, mit Liedern, mit Pauken und Harfen?
Und hast mich nicht einmal lassen meine Enkel und Töchter küssen? Nun, du hast töricht getan.
Ich hätte wohl so viel Macht, da&szlig; ich euch Böses antun könnte; aber eures Vaters Gott hat diese Nacht zu mir gesagt: Hüte dich, mit Jakob anders zu reden als freundlich.
Und wenn du schon weggezogen bist und sehntest dich so sehr nach deines Vaters Hause, warum hast du mir dann aber meinen Gott gestohlen?
Jakob antwortete und sprach zu Laban: Ich fürchtete mich und dachte, du würdest deine Töchter von mir rei&szlig;en.
Bei wem du aber deinen Gott findest, der sterbe! Hier vor unsern Brüdern suche das Deine bei mir und nimm's hin. Jakob wu&szlig;te aber nicht, da&szlig; Rahel ihn gestohlen hatte.
Da ging Laban in die Zelte Jakobs und Leas und der beiden Mägde und fand nichts. Und ging aus dem Zelte Leas in das Zelt Rahels.
Rahel aber hatte den Hausgott genommen und unter den Kamelsattel gelegt und sich darauf gesetzt. Laban aber betastete das ganze Zelt und fand nichts.
Da sprach sie zu ihrem Vater: Mein Herr, zürne nicht, denn ich kann nicht aufstehen vor dir, denn es geht mir nach der Frauen Weise. Daher fand er den Hausgott nicht, wie sehr er auch suchte.
Und Jakob wurde zornig und schalt Laban und sprach zu ihm: Was hab ich Übles getan oder gesündigt, da&szlig; du so hitzig hinter mir her bist?
Du hast all meinen Hausrat betastet. Was hast du von deinem Hausrat gefunden? Lege das her vor meinen und deinen Brüdern, da&szlig; sie zwischen uns beiden richten.
Diese zwanzig Jahre bin ich bei dir gewesen, deine Schafe und Ziegen haben keine Fehlgeburt gehabt; die Widder deiner Herde hab ich nie gegessen;
was die wilden Tiere zerrissen, brachte ich dir nicht, ich mu&szlig;te es ersetzen; du fordertest es von meiner Hand, es mochte mir des Tages oder des Nachts gestohlen sein.
Des Tages kam ich um vor Hitze und des Nachts vor Frost, und kein Schlaf kam in meine Augen.
So habe ich diese zwanzig Jahre in deinem Hause gedient, vierzehn um deine Töchter und sechs um deine Herde, und du hast mir meinen Lohn zehnmal verändert.
Wenn nicht der Gott meines Vaters, der Gott Abrahams und der Schrecken Isaaks*, auf meiner Seite gewesen wäre, du hättest mich leer ziehen lassen. Aber Gott hat mein Elend und meine Mühe angesehen und hat diese Nacht rechtes Urteil gesprochen.
Laban antwortete und sprach zu Jakob: Die Töchter sind meine Töchter, und die Kinder sind meine Kinder, und die Herden sind meine Herden, und alles, was du siehst, ist mein. Was kann ich heute für meine Töchter oder ihre Kinder tun, die sie geboren haben?a
So komm nun und la&szlig; uns einen Bund schlie&szlig;en, ich und du, der ein Zeuge sei zwischen mir und dir.
Da nahm Jakob einen Stein und richtete ihn auf zu einem Steinmal.
Laban aber sprach zu seinen Brüdern: Leset Steine auf! Und sie nahmen Steine und machten davon einen Haufen und a&szlig;en daselbst auf dem Steinhaufen.
Und Laban nannte ihn Jegar-Sahaduta, Jakob aber nannte ihn Gal-Ed.
Da sprach Laban: Der Steinhaufe sei heute Zeuge zwischen mir und dir. Daher nennt man ihn Gal-Ed*
und Mizpa*; denn er sprach: Der HERR wache als Späher über mir und dir, wenn wir voneinander gegangen sind, *d. . Spähort.
da&szlig; du meine Töchter nicht bedrückst oder andere Frauen dazu nimmst zu meinen Töchtern. Es ist hier kein Mensch bei uns; siehe aber, Gott ist der Zeuge zwischen mir und dir.
Und Laban sprach weiter zu Jakob: Siehe, das ist der Haufe, und das ist das Steinmal, das ich aufgerichtet habe zwischen mir und dir.
Dieser Steinhaufe sei Zeuge, und das Steinmal sei auch Zeuge, da&szlig; ich nicht an diesem Haufen vorüberziehe zu dir hin oder du vorüberziehest zu mir hin an diesem Haufen und diesem Mal in böser Absicht!
Der Gott Abrahams und der Gott Nahors sei Richter zwischen uns - der Gott ihres Vaters!
Und Jakob schwor ihm bei dem Schrecken Isaaks, dem Gott seines Vaters. Und Jakob opferte auf dem Gebirge und lud seine Brüder zum Essen. Und als sie gegessen hatten, blieben sie auf dem Gebirge über Nacht. 
</P><hr><h3>32. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakob rüstet sich zur Begegnung mit Esau</h3>
<p>*Am Morgen aber stand Laban früh auf, kü&szlig;te seine Enkel und Töchter und segnete sie und zog hin und kam wieder an seinen Ort. *Abweichende Verszählung statt 32,1-33: 31,55-32,32.
Jakob aber zog seinen Weg. Und es begegneten ihm die Engel Gottes.
Und als er sie sah, sprach er: Hier ist Gottes Heerlager, und nannte diese Stätte Mahanajim.
Jakob aber schickte Boten vor sich her zu seinem Bruder Esau ins Land Seïr, in das Gebiet von Edom,
und befahl ihnen und sprach: So sprecht zu Esau, meinem Herrn: Dein Knecht Jakob lä&szlig;t dir sagen: Ich bin bisher bei Laban lange in der Fremde gewesen
und habe Rinder und Esel, Schafe, Knechte und Mägde, und habe ausgesandt, es dir, meinem Herrn, anzusagen, damit ich Gnade vor deinen Augen fände.
Die Boten kamen zu Jakob zurück und sprachen: Wir kamen zu deinem Bruder Esau, und er zieht dir auch entgegen mit vierhundert Mann.
Da fürchtete sich Jakob sehr, und ihm wurde bange. Und er teilte das Volk, das bei ihm war, und die Schafe und die Rinder und die Kamele in zwei Lager
und sprach: Wenn Esau über das eine Lager kommt und macht es nieder, so wird das andere entrinnen.
Weiter sprach Jakob: Gott meines Vaters Abraham und Gott meines Vaters Isaak, der du zu mir gesagt hast: Zieh wieder in dein Land und zu deiner Verwandtschaft, ich will dir wohltun -,
HERR, ich bin zu gering aller Barmherzigkeit und aller Treue, die du an deinem Knechte getan hast; denn ich hatte nicht mehr als diesen Stab, als ich hier über den Jordan ging, und nun sind aus mir zwei Lager geworden.
Errette mich von der Hand meines Bruders, von der Hand Esaus; denn ich fürchte mich vor ihm, da&szlig; er komme und schlage mich, die Mütter samt den Kindern.
Du hast gesagt: Ich will dir wohltun und deine Nachkommen machen wie den Sand am Meer, den man der Menge wegen nicht zählen kann.
Und er blieb die Nacht da und nahm von dem, was er erworben hatte, ein Geschenk für seinen Bruder Esau:
zweihundert Ziegen, zwanzig Böcke, zweihundert Schafe, zwanzig Widder
und drei&szlig;ig säugende Kamele mit ihren Füllen, vierzig Kühe und zehn junge Stiere, zwanzig Eselinnen und zehn Esel,
und tat sie unter die Hand seiner Knechte, je eine Herde besonders, und sprach zu ihnen: Geht vor mir her und la&szlig;t Raum zwischen einer Herde und der andern.
Und er gebot dem ersten und sprach: Wenn dir mein Bruder Esau begegnet und dich fragt: Wem gehörst du an und wo willst du hin und wessen Eigentum ist das, was du vor dir hertreibst?,
sollst du sagen: Es gehört deinem Knechte Jakob, der sendet es als Geschenk seinem Herrn Esau und zieht hinter uns her.
Ebenso gebot er auch dem zweiten und dem dritten und allen, die den Herden nachgingen, und sprach: Wie ich euch gesagt habe, so saget zu Esau, wenn ihr ihm begegnet,
und saget ja auch: Siehe, dein Knecht Jakob kommt hinter uns. Denn er dachte: Ich will ihn versöhnen mit dem Geschenk, das vor mir hergeht. Danach will ich ihn sehen; vielleicht wird er mich annehmen.
So ging das Geschenk vor ihm her; er aber blieb diese Nacht im Lager.
[Note: Jakobs Kampf am Jabbok. Sein neuer Name]Und Jakob stand auf in der Nacht und nahm seine beiden Frauen und die beiden Mägde und seine elf Söhne und zog an die Furt des Jabbok,
nahm sie und führte sie über das Wasser, so da&szlig; hinüberkam, was er hatte,
und blieb allein zurück. Da rang ein Mann mit ihm, bis die Morgenröte anbrach.
Und als er sah, da&szlig; er ihn nicht übermochte, schlug er ihn auf das Gelenk seiner Hüfte, und das Gelenk der Hüfte Jakobs wurde über dem Ringen mit ihm verrenkt.
Und er sprach: La&szlig; mich gehen, denn die Morgenröte bricht an. Aber Jakob antwortete: Ich lasse dich nicht, du segnest mich denn.
Er sprach: Wie hei&szlig;est du? Er antwortete: Jakob.
Er sprach: Du sollst nicht mehr Jakob hei&szlig;en, sondern Israel; denn du hast mit Gott und mit Menschen gekämpft und hast gewonnen.
Und Jakob fragte ihn und sprach: Sage doch, wie hei&szlig;est du? Er aber sprach: Warum fragst du, wie ich hei&szlig;e? Und er segnete ihn daselbst.
Und Jakob nannte die Stätte Pnuël; denn, sprach er, ich habe Gott von Angesicht gesehen,* und doch wurde mein Leben gerettet.
Und als er an Pnuël vorüberkam, ging ihm die Sonne auf; und er hinkte an seiner Hüfte.
Daher essen die Israeliten nicht das Muskelstück auf dem Gelenk der Hüfte bis auf den heutigen Tag, weil er auf den Muskel am Gelenk der Hüfte Jakobs geschlagen hatte. 
</P><hr><h3>33. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Versöhnung mit Esau</h3>
<p>Jakob hob seine Augen auf und sah seinen Bruder Esau kommen mit vierhundert Mann. Und er verteilte seine Kinder auf Lea und auf Rahel und auf die beiden Leibmägde
und stellte die Mägde mit ihren Kindern vornean und Lea mit ihren Kindern dahinter und Rahel mit Josef zuletzt.
Und er ging vor ihnen her und neigte sich siebenmal zur Erde, bis er zu seinem Bruder kam.
Esau aber lief ihm entgegen und herzte ihn und fiel ihm um den Hals und kü&szlig;te ihn, und sie weinten.
Und Esau hob seine Augen auf und sah die Frauen mit den Kindern und sprach: Wer sind diese bei dir? Er antwortete: Es sind die Kinder, die Gott deinem Knecht beschert hat.
Und die Mägde traten herzu mit ihren Kindern und neigten sich vor ihm.
Lea trat auch herzu mit ihren Kindern, und sie neigten sich vor ihm. Danach traten Josef und Rahel herzu, und sie neigten sich auch vor ihm.
Und Esau sprach: Was willst du mit all den Herden, denen ich begegnet bin? Er antwortete: Da&szlig; ich Gnade fände vor meinem Herrn.
Esau sprach: Ich habe genug, mein Bruder; behalte, was du hast.
Jakob antwortete: Ach nein! Hab ich Gnade gefunden vor dir, so nimm mein Geschenk von meiner Hand; denn ich sah dein Angesicht, als sähe ich Gottes Angesicht, und du hast mich freundlich angesehen.
Nimm doch diese Segensgabe von mir an, die ich dir zugebracht habe; denn Gott hat sie mir beschert, und ich habe von allem genug. So nötigte er ihn, da&szlig; er sie nahm.
Und Esau sprach: La&szlig; uns aufbrechen und fortziehen; ich will mit dir ziehen.
Er aber sprach zu ihm: Mein Herr wei&szlig;, da&szlig; ich zarte Kinder bei mir habe, dazu säugende Schafe und Kühe; wenn sie auch nur einen Tag übertrieben würden, würde mir die ganze Herde sterben.
Mein Herr ziehe vor seinem Knechte her. Ich will gemächlich hintennach treiben, wie das Vieh und die Kinder gehen können, bis ich komme zu meinem Herrn nach Seïr.
Esau sprach: So will ich doch bei dir lassen etliche von meinen Leuten. Er antwortete: Ist das denn nötig? La&szlig; mich nur Gnade vor meinem Herrn finden.
So zog Esau an jenem Tage wiederum seines Weges nach Seïr.
[Note: Jakob siedelt sich bei Sichem an]Und Jakob zog nach Sukkot und baute sich ein Haus und machte seinem Vieh Hütten; daher hei&szlig;t die Stätte Sukkot*. *d. . Hütten.
Danach kam Jakob wohlbehalten zu der Stadt Sichem, die im Lande Kanaan liegt, nachdem er aus Mesopotamien gekommen war, und lagerte vor der Stadt
und kaufte das Land, wo er sein Zelt aufgeschlagen hatte, von den Söhnen Hamors, des Vaters Sichems, um hundert Goldstücke
und errichtete dort einen Altar und nannte ihn "Gott ist der Gott Israels". 
</P><hr><h3>34. Kapitel</h3><h3>Die Schandtat an Dina und das Blutbad zu Sichem</h3>
<p>Dina aber, Leas Tochter, die sie Jakob geboren hatte, ging aus, die Töchter des Landes zu sehen.
Als Sichem sie sah, der Sohn des Hiwiters Hamor, der des Landes Herr war, nahm er sie, legte sich zu ihr und tat ihr Gewalt an.
Und sein Herz hing an ihr, und er hatte das Mädchen lieb und redete freundlich mit ihr.
Und Sichem sprach zu seinem Vater Hamor: Nimm mir das Mädchen zur Frau.
Und Jakob erfuhr, da&szlig; seine Tochter Dina geschändet war; und seine Söhne waren mit dem Vieh auf dem Felde, und Jakob schwieg, bis sie kamen.
Da ging Hamor, Sichems Vater, hinaus zu Jakob, um mit ihm zu reden.
Indessen kamen die Söhne Jakobs vom Felde. Und als sie es hörten, verdro&szlig; es die Männer, und sie wurden sehr zornig, da&szlig; er eine Schandtat an Israel begangen und bei Jakobs Tochter gelegen hatte. Denn solches durfte nicht geschehen.
Da redete Hamor mit ihnen und sprach: Das Herz meines Sohnes Sichem sehnt sich nach eurer Tochter; gebt sie ihm doch zur Frau.
Verschwägert euch mit uns; gebt uns eure Töchter und nehmt ihr unsere Töchter
und wohnt bei uns. Das Land soll euch offen sein; bleibt und treibt Handel und werdet ansässig.
Und Sichem sprach zu ihrem Vater und zu ihren Brüdern: La&szlig;t mich Gnade bei euch finden; was ihr mir sagt, das will ich geben.
Fordert nur getrost von mir Brautpreis und Geschenk, ich will's geben, wie ihr's verlangt; gebt mir nur das Mädchen zur Frau.
Da antworteten Jakobs Söhne dem Sichem und seinem Vater Hamor hinterhältig, weil ihre Schwester Dina geschändet war,
und sprachen zu ihnen: Wir können das nicht tun, da&szlig; wir unsere Schwester einem unbeschnittenen Mann geben; denn das wäre uns eine Schande.
Doch dann wollen wir euch zu Willen sein, wenn ihr uns gleich werdet und alles, was männlich unter euch ist, beschnitten wird.
Dann wollen wir unsere Töchter euch geben und eure Töchter uns nehmen und bei euch wohnen und ein Volk sein.
Wenn ihr aber nicht einwilligen wollt, euch zu beschneiden, so wollen wir unsere Schwester nehmen und davonziehen.
Die Rede gefiel Hamor und seinem Sohn gut.
Und der Jüngling zögerte nicht, dies zu tun; denn er hatte gro&szlig;es Gefallen an der Tochter Jakobs. Und er war mehr angesehen als alle in seines Vaters Hause.
Da kamen sie nun, Hamor und sein Sohn Sichem, zum Tor ihrer Stadt und redeten mit den Bürgern der Stadt und sprachen:
Diese Leute sind friedsam bei uns; la&szlig;t sie im Lande wohnen und Handel treiben; das Land ist weit genug für sie. Wir wollen uns ihre Töchter zu Frauen nehmen und ihnen unsere Töchter geben.
Aber nur dann wollen sie uns zu Willen sein, da&szlig; sie bei uns wohnen und ein Volk mit uns werden, wenn wir alles, was männlich unter uns ist, beschneiden, gleichwie sie beschnitten sind.
Ihr Vieh und ihre Güter und alles, was sie haben, wird es nicht unser sein? So wollen wir ihnen nur zu Willen sein, damit sie bei uns wohnen.
Und sie gehorchten dem Hamor und Sichem, seinem Sohn, alle, die zum Tor seiner Stadt aus- und eingingen, und beschnitten alles, was männlich war, das zu seiner Stadt aus- und einging.
Aber am dritten Tage, als sie Schmerzen hatten, nahmen die zwei Söhne Jakobs Simeon und Levi, die Brüder der Dina, ein jeder sein Schwert und überfielen die friedliche Stadt und erschlugen alles, was männlich war,
und erschlugen auch Hamor und seinen Sohn Sichem mit der Schärfe des Schwerts und nahmen ihre Schwester Dina aus dem Hause Sichems und gingen davon.
Da kamen die Söhne Jakobs über die Erschlagenen und plünderten die Stadt, weil man ihre Schwester geschändet hatte,
und nahmen ihre Schafe, Rinder, Esel und was in der Stadt und auf dem Felde war
und alle ihre Habe; alle Kinder und Frauen führten sie gefangen hinweg und plünderten alles, was in den Häusern war.
Aber Jakob sprach zu Simeon und Levi: Ihr habt mich ins Unglück gestürzt und in Verruf gebracht bei den Bewohnern dieses Landes, den Kanaanitern und Perisitern, und ich habe nur wenige Leute. Wenn sie sich nun gegen mich versammeln, werden sie mich erschlagen. So werde ich vertilgt samt meinem Hause.
Sie antworteten aber: Durfte er denn an unserer Schwester wie an einer Hure handeln? 
</P><hr><h3>35. Kapitel</h3><h3>Gott segnet Jakob in Bethel</h3>
<p>Und Gott sprach zu Jakob: Mach dich auf und zieh nach Bethel und wohne daselbst und errichte dort einen Altar dem Gott, der dir erschien, als du flohest vor deinem Bruder Esau.
Da sprach Jakob zu seinem Hause und zu allen, die mit ihm waren: Tut von euch die fremden Götter, die unter euch sind, und reinigt euch und wechselt eure Kleider,
und la&szlig;t uns aufbrechen und nach Bethel ziehen, da&szlig; ich dort einen Altar errichte dem Gott, der mich erhört hat zur Zeit meiner Trübsal und mit mir gewesen ist auf dem Wege, den ich gezogen bin.
Da gaben sie ihm alle fremden Götter, die in ihren Händen waren, und ihre Ohrringe, und er vergrub sie unter der Eiche, die bei Sichem stand.
Und sie brachen auf. Und es kam ein Gottesschrecken über die Städte, die um sie her lagen, so da&szlig; sie den Söhnen Jakobs nicht nachjagten.
So kam Jakob nach Lus im Lande Kanaan, das nun Bethel hei&szlig;t, samt all dem Volk, das mit ihm war,
und er baute dort einen Altar und nannte die Stätte El-Bethel, weil Gott sich ihm daselbst offenbart hatte, als er vor seinem Bruder floh.
Da starb Debora, die Amme der Rebekka, und wurde begraben unterhalb von Bethel unter der Eiche; die wurde genannt die Klageeiche.
Und Gott erschien Jakob abermals, nachdem er aus Mesopotamien gekommen war, und segnete ihn
und sprach zu ihm: Du hei&szlig;t Jakob; aber du sollst nicht mehr Jakob hei&szlig;en, sondern Israel sollst du hei&szlig;en. Und so nannte er ihn Israel.
Und Gott sprach zu ihm: Ich bin der allmächtige Gott; sei fruchtbar und mehre dich! Ein Volk und eine Menge von Völkern sollen von dir kommen, und Könige sollen von dir abstammen,
und das Land, das ich Abraham und Isaak gegeben habe, will ich dir geben und will's deinem Geschlecht nach dir geben.
Und Gott fuhr auf von ihm an der Stätte, da er mit ihm geredet hatte.
Jakob aber richtete ein steinernes Mal auf an der Stätte, da er mit ihm geredet hatte, und go&szlig; Trankopfer darauf und bego&szlig; es mit Öl.
Und Jakob nannte die Stätte, da Gott mit ihm geredet hatte, Bethel.
[Note: Benjamins Geburt und Rahels Tod]Und sie brachen auf von Bethel. Und als es noch eine Strecke Weges war bis Efrata, da gebar Rahel. Und es kam sie hart an über der Geburt.
Da ihr aber die Geburt so schwer wurde, sprach die Wehmutter zu ihr: Fürchte dich nicht, denn auch diesmal wirst du einen Sohn haben.
Als ihr aber das Leben entwich und sie sterben mu&szlig;te, nannte sie ihn Ben-Oni*, aber sein Vater nannte ihn Ben-Jamin*. *d. . Sohn meines Unglücks bzw. Sohn des Glücks.
So starb Rahel und wurde begraben an dem Wege nach Efrata, das nun Bethlehem hei&szlig;t.
Und Jakob richtete einen Stein auf über ihrem Grab; das ist das Grabmal Rahels bis auf diesen Tag.
Und Israel zog weiter und schlug sein Zelt auf jenseits von Migdal-Eder.
Und es begab sich, als Israel im Lande wohnte, ging Ruben hin und legte sich zu Bilha, seines Vaters Nebenfrau. Und das kam vor Israel. (vgl. 1. Chr 2,1.2) Es hatte aber Jakob zwölf Söhne.
Die Söhne Leas waren diese: Ruben, der erstgeborene Sohn Jakobs, Simeon, Levi, Juda, Issachar und S ebulon.
Die Söhne Rahels waren: Josef und Benjamin.
Die Söhne Bilhas, Rahels Magd: Dan und Naftali.
Die Söhne Silpas, Leas Magd: Gad und Asser. Das sind die Söhne Jakobs, die ihm geboren sind in Mesopotamien.
[Note: Jakobs Heimkehr. Isaaks Tod]Und Jakob kam zu seinem Vater Isaak nach Mamre, nach Kirjat-Arba, das ist Hebron, wo Abraham und Isaak als Fremdlinge gelebt hatten.
Und Isaak wurde hundertundachtzig Jahre alt,
verschied und starb und wurde versammelt zu seinen Vätern, alt und lebenssatt. Und seine Söhne Esau und Jakob begruben ihn. 
</P><hr><h3>36. Kapitel</h3><h3>Geschlechtsregister Esaus</h3><h3>(vgl. 1. Chr 1,35-54)</h3>
<p>Dies ist das Geschlecht Esaus, der auch Edom hei&szlig;t:
Esau nahm sich Frauen von den Töchtern Kanaans: Ada, die Tochter Elons, des Hetiters, und Oholibama, die Tochter des Ana, des Sohnes Zibons, des Horiters,
und Basemat, Ismaels Tochter, Nebajots Schwester.
Und Ada gebar dem Esau Elifas, und Basemat gebar Reguïl.
Oholibama gebar Jëusch, Jalam und Korach. Das sind Esaus Söhne, die ihm geboren sind im Lande Kanaan.
Und Esau nahm seine Frauen, Söhne und Töchter und alle Leute seines Hauses, seine Habe und alles Vieh mit allen Gütern, die er im Lande Kanaan erworben hatte, und zog in das Land Seïr, hinweg von seinem Bruder Jakob.
Denn ihre Habe war zu gro&szlig;, als da&szlig; sie beieinander wohnen konnten; das Land, darin sie Fremdlinge waren, vermochte sie nicht zu ernähren wegen der Menge ihres Viehs.
Daher wohnte Esau auf dem Gebirge Seïr. Esau ist Edom.
Dies ist das Geschlecht Esaus, von dem die Edomiter herkommen auf dem Gebirge Seïr,
und so hei&szlig;en die Söhne Esaus: Elifas, der Sohn Adas, der Frau Esaus; Reguïl, der Sohn Basemats, der Frau Esaus.
Des Elifas Söhne aber waren diese: Teman, Omar, Zefo, Gatam und Kenas.
Und Timna war eine Nebenfrau des Elifas, des Sohnes Esaus; die gebar ihm Amalek. Das sind die Söhne von Ada, der Frau Esaus.
Die Söhne aber Reguïls sind diese: Nahat, Serach, Schamma, Misa. Das sind die Söhne von Basemat, der Frau Esaus.
Die Söhne aber von Oholibama, der Frau Esaus, der Tochter des Ana, des Sohnes Zibons, die sie dem Esau gebar, sind diese: Jëusch, Jalam und Korach.
Dies sind die Stammesfürsten der Söhne Esaus. Die Söhne des Elifas, des ersten Sohnes Esaus: Der Fürst Teman, der Fürst Omar, der Fürst Zefo, der Fürst Kenas,
der Fürst Korach, der Fürst Gatam, der Fürst Amalek. Das sind die Fürsten von Elifas im Lande Edom und sind Söhne von der Ada.
Und dies sind die Söhne Reguïls, des Sohnes Esaus: Der Fürst Nahat, der Fürst Serach, der Fürst Schamma, der Fürst Misa. Das sind die Fürsten von Reguël im Lande der Edomiter und sind Söhne von der Basemat, der Frau Esaus.
Dies sind die Söhne Oholibamas, der Frau Esaus: Der Fürst Jëusch, der Fürst Jalam, der Fürst Korach. Das sind die Fürsten von Oholibama, der Tochter des Ana, der Frau Esaus.
Das sind Esaus Söhne und ihre Fürsten. Das ist Edom.
Die Söhne aber von Seïr, dem Horiter, die im Lande wohnten, sind diese: Lotan, Schobal, Zibon, Ana,
Dischon, Ezer und Dischan. Das sind die Stammesfürsten der Horiter, Söhne des Seïr, im Lande Edom.
Aber des Lotan Söhne waren diese: Hori und Hemam; und Lotans Schwester hie&szlig; Timna.
Die Söhne von Schobal waren diese: Alwan, Manahat, Ebal, Schefi und Onam.
Die Söhne von Zibon waren: Ajja und Ana. Das ist der Ana, der in der Steppe die warmen Quellen fand, als er die Esel seines Vaters Zibon hütete.
Der Sohn Anas aber war: Dischon; und Oholibama war die Tochter Anas.
Die Söhne Dischons waren: Hemdan, Eschban, Jitran und Keran.
Die Söhne Ezers waren: Bilhan, Saawan und Akan.
Die Söhne Dischans waren: Uz und Aran.
Dies sind die Stammesfürsten der Horiter: Der Fürst Lotan, der Fürst Schobal, der Fürst Zibon, der Fürst Ana,
der Fürst Dischon, der Fürst Ezer, der Fürst Dischan. Das sind die Fürsten der Horiter nach ihren Stämmen im Lande Seïr.
[Note: Die früheren Könige der Edomiter]Die Könige aber, die im Lande Edom regiert haben, bevor Israel Könige hatte, sind diese:
Bela war König von Edom, ein Sohn Beors, und seine Stadt hie&szlig; Dinhaba.
Und als Bela starb, wurde König an seiner Statt Jobab, ein Sohn Serachs von Bozra.
Als Jobab starb, wurde an seiner Statt König Huscham aus dem Lande der Temaniter.
Als Huscham starb, wurde König an seiner Statt Hadad, ein Sohn Bedads, der die Midianiter schlug auf dem Felde der Moabiter; und seine Stadt hie&szlig; Awit.
Als Hadad starb, regierte Samla von Masreka.
Als Samla starb, wurde Schaul von Rehobot am Strom König an seiner Statt.
Als Schaul starb, wurde König an seiner Statt Baal-Hanan, der Sohn Achbors.
Als Baal-Hanan, Achbors Sohn, starb, wurde König an seiner Statt Hadar; und seine Stadt hie&szlig; Pagu, und seine Frau hie&szlig; Mehetabel, eine Tochter Matreds, die Me-Sahabs Tochter war.
[Note: Die Stammesfürsten der Edomiter]So hei&szlig;en die Fürsten von Esau nach ihren Geschlechtern, Orten und Namen: Der Fürst Timna, der Fürst Alwa, der Fürst Jetet,
der Fürst Oholibama, der Fürst Ela, der Fürst Pinon,
der Fürst Kenas, der Fürst Teman, der Fürst Mibzar,
der Fürst Magdïl, der Fürst Iram. Das sind die Fürsten von Edom nach ihren Wohnsitzen in ihrem Erblande. Das ist Esau, der Stammvater der Edomiter. 
</P><hr><h3>37. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josefs Träume</h3>
<p>Jakob aber wohnte im Lande, in dem sein Vater ein Fremdling gewesen war, im Lande Kanaan.
Und dies ist die Geschichte von Jakobs Geschlecht: Josef war siebzehn Jahre alt und war ein Hirte bei den Schafen mit seinen Brüdern; er war Gehilfe bei den Söhnen Bilhas und Silpas, der Frauen seines Vaters, und brachte es vor ihren Vater, wenn etwas Schlechtes über sie geredet wurde.
Israel aber hatte Josef lieber als alle seine Söhne, weil er der Sohn seines Alters war, und machte ihm einen bunten Rock.
Als nun seine Brüder sahen, da&szlig; ihn ihr Vater lieber hatte als alle seine Brüder, wurden sie ihm feind und konnten ihm kein freundliches Wort sagen.
Dazu hatte Josef einmal einen Traum und sagte seinen Brüdern davon; da wurden sie ihm noch mehr feind.
Denn er sprach zu ihnen: Höret doch, was mir geträumt hat.
Siehe, wir banden Garben auf dem Felde, und meine Garbe richtete sich auf und stand, aber eure Garben stellten sich ringsumher und neigten sich vor meiner Garbe.
Da sprachen seine Brüder zu ihm: Willst du unser König werden und über uns herrschen? Und sie wurden ihm noch mehr feind um seines Traumes und seiner Worte willen.
Und er hatte noch einen zweiten Traum, den erzählte er seinen Brüdern und sprach: Ich habe noch einen Traum gehabt; siehe, die Sonne und der Mond und elf Sterne neigten sich vor mir.
Und als er das seinem Vater und seinen Brüdern erzählte, schalt ihn sein Vater und sprach zu ihm: Was ist das für ein Traum, den du geträumt hast? Soll ich und deine Mutter und deine Brüder kommen und vor dir niederfallen?
Und seine Brüder wurden neidisch auf ihn. Aber sein Vater behielt diese Worte.
[Note: Josef wird nach Ägypten verkauft]Als nun seine Brüder hingegangen waren, um das Vieh ihres Vaters in Sichem zu weiden,
sprach Israel zu Josef: Hüten nicht deine Brüder das Vieh in Sichem? Komm, ich will dich zu ihnen senden. Er aber sprach: Hier bin ich.
Und er sprach: Geh hin und sieh, ob's gut steht um deine Brüder und um das Vieh, und sage mir dann, wie sich's verhält. Und er sandte ihn aus dem Tal von Hebron, und er kam nach Sichem.
Da fand ihn ein Mann, wie er umherirrte auf dem Felde; der fragte ihn und sprach:
Wen suchst du? Er antwortete: Ich suche meine Brüder; sage mir doch, wo sie hüten.
Der Mann sprach: Sie sind von dannen gezogen; denn ich hörte, da&szlig; sie sagten: La&szlig;t uns nach Dotan gehen. Da zog Josef seinen Brüdern nach und fand sie in Dotan.
Als sie ihn nun sahen von ferne, ehe er nahe zu ihnen kam, machten sie einen Anschlag, da&szlig; sie ihn töteten,
und sprachen untereinander: Seht, der Träumer kommt daher!
So kommt nun und la&szlig;t uns ihn töten und in eine Grube werfen und sagen, ein böses Tier habe ihn gefressen; so wird man sehen, was seine Träume sind.
Als das Ruben hörte, wollte er ihn aus ihren Händen erretten und sprach: La&szlig;t uns ihn nicht töten!a
Und weiter sprach Ruben zu ihnen: Vergie&szlig;t nicht Blut, sondern werft ihn in die Grube hier in der Wüste und legt die Hand nicht an ihn! Er wollte ihn aber aus ihrer Hand erretten und ihn seinem Vater wiederbringen.
Als nun Josef zu seinen Brüdern kam, zogen sie ihm seinen Rock aus, den bunten Rock, den er anhatte,
und nahmen ihn und warfen ihn in die Grube; aber die Grube war leer und kein Wasser darin.
Und sie setzten sich nieder, um zu essen. Indessen hoben sie ihre Augen auf und sahen eine Karawane von Ismaelitern kommen von Gilead mit ihren Kamelen; die trugen kostbares Harz, Balsam und Myrrhe und zogen hinab nach Ägypten.
Da sprach Juda zu seinen Brüdern: Was hilft's uns, da&szlig; wir unsern Bruder töten und sein Blut verbergen?
Kommt, la&szlig;t uns ihn den Ismaelitern verkaufen, damit sich unsere Hände nicht an ihm vergreifen; denn er ist unser Bruder, unser Fleisch und Blut. Und sie gehorchten ihm.
Als aber die midianitischen Kaufleute vorüberkamen, zogen sie ihn heraus aus der Grube und verkauften ihn um zwanzig Silberstücke den Ismaelitern; die brachten ihn nach Ägypten.
Als nun Ruben wieder zur Grube kam und Josef nicht darin fand, zerri&szlig; er sein Kleid
und kam wieder zu seinen Brüdern und sprach: Der Knabe ist nicht da! Wo soll ich hin?
Da nahmen sie Josefs Rock und schlachteten einen Ziegenbock und tauchten den Rock ins Blut
und schickten den bunten Rock hin und lie&szlig;en ihn ihrem Vater bringen und sagen: Diesen haben wir gefunden; sieh, ob's deines Sohnes Rock sei oder nicht.
Er erkannte ihn aber und sprach: Es ist meines Sohnes Rock; ein böses Tier hat ihn gefressen, ein rei&szlig;endes Tier hat Josef zerrissen!
Und Jakob zerri&szlig; seine Kleider und legte ein härenes Tuch um seine Lenden und trug Leid um seinen Sohn lange Zeit.
Und alle seine Söhne und Töchter kamen zu ihm, ihn zu trösten; aber er wollte sich nicht trösten lassen und sprach: Ich werde mit Leid hinunterfahren zu den Toten, zu meinem Sohn. Und sein Vater beweinte ihn.
Aber die Midianiter verkauften ihn in Ägypten an Potifar, des Pharao Kämmerer und Obersten der Leibwache. 
</P><hr><h3>38. Kapitel</h3><h3>Juda und Tamar</h3>
<p>Es begab sich um diese Zeit, da&szlig; Juda hinabzog von seinen Brüdern und gesellte sich zu einem Mann aus Adullam, der hie&szlig; Hira.
Und Juda sah dort die Tochter eines Kanaaniters, der hie&szlig; Schua, und nahm sie zur Frau. Und als er zu ihr einging,
ward sie schwanger und gebar einen Sohn, den nannte er Er.
Und sie ward abermals schwanger und gebar einen Sohn, den nannte sie Onan.
Sie gebar abermals einen Sohn, den nannte sie Schela; und sie war in Kesib, als sie ihn gebar.
Und Juda gab seinem ersten Sohn Er eine Frau, die hie&szlig; Tamar.
Aber Er war böse vor dem HERRN, darum lie&szlig; ihn der HERR sterben.
Da sprach Juda zu Onan: Geh zu deines Bruders Frau und nimm sie zur Schwagerehe, auf da&szlig; du deinem Bruder Nachkommen schaffest.
Aber da Onan wu&szlig;te, da&szlig; die Kinder nicht sein eigen sein sollten, lie&szlig; er's auf die Erde fallen und verderben, wenn er einging zu seines Bruders Frau, auf da&szlig; er seinem Bruder nicht Nachkommen schaffe.
Dem HERRN mi&szlig;fiel aber, was er tat, und er lie&szlig; ihn auch sterben.
Da sprach Juda zu seiner Schwiegertochter Tamar: Bleibe eine Witwe in deines Vaters Hause, bis mein Sohn Schela gro&szlig; wird. Denn er dachte, vielleicht würde der auch sterben wie seine Brüder. So ging Tamar hin und blieb in ihres Vaters Hause.
Als nun viele Tage verlaufen waren, starb Judas Frau, die Tochter des Schua. Und nachdem Juda ausgetrauert hatte, ging er hinauf, seine Schafe zu scheren, nach Timna mit seinem Freunde Hira von Adullam.
Da wurde der Tamar gesagt: Siehe, dein Schwiegervater geht hinauf nach Timna, seine Schafe zu scheren.
Da legte sie die Witwenkleider von sich, die sie trug, deckte sich mit einem Schleier und verhüllte sich und setzte sich vor das Tor von Enajim an dem Wege nach Timna; denn sie hatte gesehen, da&szlig; Schela gro&szlig; geworden war, aber sie wurde ihm nicht zur Frau gegeben.
Als Juda sie nun sah, meinte er, es wäre eine Hure, denn sie hatte ihr Angesicht verdeckt.
Und er machte sich zu ihr am Wege und sprach: La&szlig; mich doch zu dir kommen; denn er wu&szlig;te nicht, da&szlig; es seine Schwiegertochter war. Sie antwortete: Was willst du mir geben, wenn du zu mir kommst?
Er sprach: Ich will dir einen Ziegenbock von der Herde senden. Sie antwortete: So gib mir ein Pfand, bis du ihn mir sendest.
Er sprach: Was willst du für ein Pfand, das ich dir geben soll? Sie antwortete: Dein Siegel und deine Schnur und deinen Stab, den du in der Hand hast. Da gab er's ihr und kam zu ihr; und sie ward von ihm schwanger.
Und sie machte sich auf und ging hinweg und legte den Schleier ab und zog ihre Witwenkleider wieder an.
Juda aber sandte den Ziegenbock durch seinen Freund von Adullam, damit er das Pfand zurückholte von der Frau. Und er fand sie nicht.
Da fragte er die Leute des Ortes und sprach: Wo ist die Hure, die zu Enajim am Wege sa&szlig;? Sie antworteten: Es ist keine Hure da gewesen.
Und er kam wieder zu Juda und sprach: Ich habe sie nicht gefunden; dazu sagen die Leute des Ortes, es sei keine Hure da gewesen.
Juda sprach: Sie mag's behalten, damit wir nur nicht in Verruf geraten! Siehe, ich habe den Bock gesandt, und du hast sie nicht gefunden.
Nach drei Monaten wurde Juda angesagt: Deine Schwiegertochter Tamar hat Hurerei getrieben; und siehe, sie ist davon schwanger geworden. Juda sprach: Führt sie heraus, da&szlig; sie verbrannt werde.
Und als man sie hinausführte, schickte sie zu ihrem Schwiegervater und sprach: Von dem Mann bin ich schwanger, dem dies gehört. Und sie sprach: Erkennst du auch, wem dies Siegel und diese Schnur und dieser Stab gehören?
Juda erkannte es und sprach: Sie ist gerechter als ich; denn ich habe sie meinem Sohn Schela nicht gegeben. Doch wohnte er ihr nicht mehr bei.
Und als sie gebären sollte, wurden Zwillinge in ihrem Leibe gefunden.
Und als sie gebar, tat sich eine Hand heraus. Da nahm die Wehmutter einen roten Faden und band ihn darum und sprach: Der ist zuerst herausgekommen.
Als aber der seine Hand wieder hineinzog, kam sein Bruder heraus, und sie sprach: Warum hast du um deinetwillen solchen Ri&szlig; gerissen? Und man nannte ihn Perez.
Danach kam sein Bruder heraus, der den roten Faden um seine Hand hatte. Und man nannte ihn Serach. 
</P><hr><h3>39. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josef in Potifars Haus</h3>
<p>Josef wurde hinab nach Ägypten geführt, und Potifar, ein ägyptischer Mann, des Pharao Kämmerer und Oberster der Leibwache, kaufte ihn von den Ismaelitern, die ihn hinabgebracht hatten.
Und der HERR war mit Josef, so da&szlig; er ein Mann wurde, dem alles glückte. Und er war in seines Herrn, des Ägypters, Hause.
Und sein Herr sah, da&szlig; der HERR mit ihm war; denn alles, was er tat, das lie&szlig; der HERR in seiner Hand glücken,
so da&szlig; er Gnade fand vor seinem Herrn und sein Diener wurde. Der setzte ihn über sein Haus; und alles, was er hatte, tat er unter seine Hände.
Und von der Zeit an, da er ihn über sein Haus und alle seine Güter gesetzt hatte, segnete der HERR des Ägypters Haus um Josefs willen, und es war lauter Segen des HERRN in allem, was er hatte, zu Hause und auf dem Felde.
Darum lie&szlig; er alles unter Josefs Händen, was er hatte, und kümmerte sich, da er ihn hatte, um nichts au&szlig;er um das, was er a&szlig; und trank. Und Josef war schön an Gestalt und hübsch von Angesicht.
Und es begab sich danach, da&szlig; seines Herrn Frau ihre Augen auf Josef warf und sprach: Lege dich zu mir!
Er weigerte sich aber und sprach zu ihr: Siehe, mein Herr kümmert sich, da er mich hat, um nichts, was im Hause ist, und alles, was er hat, das hat er unter meine Hände getan;
er ist in diesem Hause nicht grö&szlig;er als ich, und er hat mir nichts vorenthalten au&szlig;er dir, weil du seine Frau bist. Wie sollte ich denn nun ein solch gro&szlig;es Übel tun und gegen Gott sündigen?a
Und sie bedrängte Josef mit solchen Worten täglich. Aber er gehorchte ihr nicht, da&szlig; er sich zu ihr legte und bei ihr wäre.
Es begab sich eines Tages, da&szlig; Josef in das Haus ging, seine Arbeit zu tun, und kein Mensch vom Gesinde des Hauses war dabei.
Und sie erwischte ihn bei seinem Kleid und sprach: Lege dich zu mir! Aber er lie&szlig; das Kleid in ihrer Hand und floh und lief zum Hause hinaus.
Als sie nun sah, da&szlig; er sein Kleid in ihrer Hand lie&szlig; und hinaus entfloh,
rief sie das Gesinde ihres Hauses und sprach zu ihnen: Seht, er hat uns den hebräischen Mann hergebracht, da&szlig; der seinen Mutwillen mit uns treibe. Er kam zu mir herein und wollte sich zu mir legen; aber ich rief mit lauter Stimme.
Und als er hörte, da&szlig; ich ein Geschrei machte und rief, da lie&szlig; er sein Kleid bei mir und floh und lief hinaus.
Und sie legte sein Kleid neben sich, bis sein Herr heimkam,
und sagte zu ihm ebendieselben Worte und sprach: Der hebräische Knecht, den du uns hergebracht hast, kam zu mir herein und wollte seinen Mutwillen mit mir treiben.
Als ich aber ein Geschrei machte und rief, da lie&szlig; er sein Kleid bei mir und floh hinaus.
[Note: Josef im Gefängnis]Als sein Herr die Worte seiner Frau hörte, die sie ihm sagte und sprach: So hat dein Knecht an mir getan, wurde er sehr zornig.
Da nahm ihn sein Herr und legte ihn ins Gefängnis, in dem des Königs Gefangene waren. Und er lag allda im Gefängnis.
Aber der HERR war mit ihm und neigte die Herzen zu ihm und lie&szlig; ihn Gnade finden vor dem Amtmann über das Gefängnis,
so da&szlig; er ihm alle Gefangenen im Gefängnis unter seine Hand gab und alles, was dort geschah, durch ihn geschehen mu&szlig;te.
Der Amtmann über das Gefängnis kümmerte sich um nichts; denn der HERR war mit Josef, und was er tat, dazu gab der HERR Glück. 
</P><hr><h3>40. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josef legt zwei Gefangenen ihre Träume aus</h3>
<p>Und es begab sich danach, da&szlig; sich der Mundschenk des Königs von Ägypten und der Bäcker versündigten an ihrem Herrn, dem König von Ägypten.
Und der Pharao wurde zornig über seine beiden Kämmerer, gegen den Obersten über die Schenken und gegen den Obersten über die Bäcker,
und lie&szlig; sie setzen in des Amtmanns Haus ins Gefängnis, wo Josef gefangen lag.
Und der Amtmann gab ihnen Josef bei, da&szlig; er ihnen diente. Und sie sa&szlig;en etliche Zeit im Gefängnis.
Und es träumte ihnen beiden, dem Schenken und dem Bäcker des Königs von Ägypten, in einer Nacht einem jeden ein eigener Traum, und eines jeden Traum hatte seine Bedeutung.
Als nun am Morgen Josef zu ihnen hineinkam und sah, da&szlig; sie traurig waren,
fragte er sie und sprach: Warum seid ihr heute so traurig?
Sie antworteten: Es hat uns geträumt, und wir haben niemand, der es uns auslege. Josef sprach: Auslegen gehört Gott zu; doch erzählt mir's.
Da erzählte der oberste Schenk seinen Traum und sprach zu Josef: Mir hat geträumt, da&szlig; ein Weinstock vor mir wäre,
der hatte drei Reben, und er grünte, wuchs und blühte, und seine Trauben wurden reif.
Und ich hatte den Becher des Pharao in meiner Hand und nahm die Beeren und zerdrückte sie in den Becher und gab den Becher dem Pharao in die Hand.
Josef sprach zu ihm: Das ist seine Deutung: Drei Reben sind drei Tage.
Nach drei Tagen wird der Pharao dein Haupt erheben und dich wieder in dein Amt setzen, da&szlig; du ihm den Becher in die Hand gebest wie vormals, als du sein Schenk warst.
Aber gedenke meiner, wenn dir's wohlgeht, und tu Barmherzigkeit an mir, da&szlig; du dem Pharao von mir sagst und mich so aus diesem Hause bringst.
Denn ich bin aus dem Lande der Hebräer heimlich gestohlen worden; und auch hier hab ich nichts getan, weswegen sie mich hätten ins Gefängnis setzen dürfen.
Als der oberste Bäcker sah, da&szlig; die Deutung gut war, sprach er zu Josef: Mir hat auch geträumt, ich trüge drei Körbe mit feinem Backwerk auf meinem Haupt
und im obersten Korbe allerlei Gebackenes für den Pharao, und die Vögel fra&szlig;en aus dem Korbe auf meinem Haupt.
Josef antwortete und sprach: Das ist seine Deutung: Drei Körbe sind drei Tage.
Und nach drei Tagen wird der Pharao dein Haupt erheben und dich an den Galgen hängen, und die Vögel werden dein Fleisch von dir fressen.
Und es geschah am dritten Tage, da beging der Pharao seinen Geburtstag. Und er machte ein Festmahl für alle seine Gro&szlig;en und erhob das Haupt des obersten Schenken und das Haupt des obersten Bäckers unter seinen Gro&szlig;en
und setzte den obersten Schenken wieder in sein Amt, da&szlig; er den Becher reiche in des Pharao Hand,
aber den obersten Bäcker lie&szlig; er aufhängen, wie ihnen Josef gedeutet hatte.
Aber der oberste Schenk dachte nicht an Josef, sondern verga&szlig; ihn. 
</P><hr><h3>41. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josef deutet die Träume des Pharao</h3>
<p>Und nach zwei Jahren hatte der Pharao einen Traum, er stünde am Nil
und sähe aus dem Wasser steigen sieben schöne, fette Kühe; die gingen auf der Weide im Grase.
Nach diesen sah er andere sieben Kühe aus dem Wasser aufsteigen; die waren hä&szlig;lich und mager und traten neben die Kühe am Ufer des Nils.
Und die hä&szlig;lichen und mageren fra&szlig;en die sieben schönen, fetten Kühe. Da erwachte der Pharao.
Und er schlief wieder ein, und ihm träumte abermals, und er sah, da&szlig; sieben Ähren aus einem Halm wuchsen, voll und dick.
Danach sah er sieben dünne Ähren aufgehen, die waren vom Ostwind versengt.
Und die sieben mageren Ähren verschlangen die sieben dicken und vollen Ähren. Da erwachte der Pharao und merkte, da&szlig; es ein Traum war.
Und als es Morgen wurde, war sein Geist bekümmert, und er schickte aus und lie&szlig; rufen alle Wahrsager in Ägypten und alle Weisen und erzählte ihnen seine Träume. Aber da war keiner, der sie dem Pharao deuten konnte.
Da redete der oberste Schenk zum Pharao und sprach: Ich mu&szlig; heute an meine Sünden denken:
Als der Pharao zornig wurde über seine Knechte und mich mit dem obersten Bäcker ins Gefängnis legte in des Amtmanns Hause,
da träumte uns beiden in einer Nacht einem jeden sein Traum, dessen Deutung ihn betraf.
Da war bei uns ein hebräischer Jüngling, des Amtmanns Knecht, dem erzählten wir's. Und er deutete uns unsere Träume, einem jeden nach seinem Traum.
Und wie er uns deutete, so ist's gekommen; denn ich bin wieder in mein Amt gesetzt, aber jener wurde aufgehängt.
Da sandte der Pharao hin und lie&szlig; Josef rufen, und sie lie&szlig;en ihn eilends aus dem Gefängnis. Und er lie&szlig; sich scheren und zog andere Kleider an und kam hinein zum Pharao.
Da sprach der Pharao zu ihm: Ich habe einen Traum gehabt, und es ist niemand, der ihn deuten kann. Ich habe aber von dir sagen hören, wenn du einen Traum hörst, so kannst du ihn deuten.
Josef antwortete dem Pharao und sprach: Das steht nicht bei mir; Gott wird jedoch dem Pharao Gutes verkünden.
Der Pharao sprach zu Josef: Mir träumte, ich stand am Ufer des Nils
und sah aus dem Wasser steigen sieben schöne, fette Kühe; die gingen auf der Weide im Grase.
Und nach ihnen sah ich andere sieben dürre, sehr hä&szlig;liche und magere Kühe heraussteigen. Ich hab in ganz Ägyptenland nicht so hä&szlig;liche gesehen.
Und die sieben mageren und hä&szlig;lichen Kühe fra&szlig;en die sieben ersten, fetten Kühe auf.
Und als sie die hineingefressen hatten, merkte man's ihnen nicht an, da&szlig; sie die gefressen hatten, und waren hä&szlig;lich wie zuvor. Da wachte ich auf.
Und ich sah abermals in meinem Traum sieben Ähren auf einem Halm wachsen, voll und dick.
Danach gingen auf sieben dürre Ähren, dünn und versengt.
Und die sieben dünnen Ähren verschlangen die sieben dicken Ähren. Und ich habe es den Wahrsagern gesagt, aber die können's mir nicht deuten.
Josef antwortete dem Pharao: Beide Träume des Pharao bedeuten das gleiche. Gott verkündet dem Pharao, was er vorhat.
Die sieben schönen Kühe sind sieben Jahre, und die sieben guten Ähren sind dieselben sieben Jahre. Es ist ein und derselbe Traum.
Die sieben mageren und hä&szlig;lichen Kühe, die nach jenen aufgestiegen sind, das sind sieben Jahre, und die sieben mageren und versengten Ähren sind sieben Jahre des Hungers.
Das meinte ich, wenn ich gesagt habe zum Pharao, da&szlig; Gott dem Pharao zeigt, was er vorhat.
Siehe, sieben reiche Jahre werden kommen in ganz Ägyptenland.
Und nach ihnen werden sieben Jahre des Hungers kommen, so da&szlig; man vergessen wird alle Fülle in Ägyptenland. Und der Hunger wird das Land verzehren,
da&szlig; man nichts wissen wird von der Fülle im Lande vor der Hungersnot, die danach kommt; denn sie wird sehr schwer sein.
Da&szlig; aber dem Pharao zweimal geträumt hat, bedeutet, da&szlig; Gott solches gewi&szlig; und eilends tun wird.
Nun sehe der Pharao nach einem verständigen und weisen Mann, den er über Ägyptenland setze,
und sorge dafür, da&szlig; er Amtleute verordne im Lande und nehme den Fünften in Ägyptenland in den sieben reichen Jahren
und lasse sie sammeln den ganzen Ertrag der guten Jahre, die kommen werden, da&szlig; sie Getreide aufschütten in des Pharao Kornhäusern zum Vorrat in den Städten und es verwahren,
damit für Nahrung gesorgt sei für das Land in den sieben Jahren des Hungers, die über Ägyptenland kommen werden, und das Land nicht vor Hunger verderbe.
[Note: Josefs Erhöhung]Die Rede gefiel dem Pharao und allen seinen Gro&szlig;en gut.
Und der Pharao sprach zu seinen Gro&szlig;en: Wie könnten wir einen Mann finden, in dem der Geist Gottes ist wie in diesem?a
Und er sprach zu Josef: Weil dir Gott dies alles kundgetan hat, ist keiner so verständig und weise wie du.
Du sollst über mein Haus sein, und deinem Wort soll all mein Volk gehorsam sein; allein um den königlichen Thron will ich höher sein als du.
Und weiter sprach der Pharao zu Josef: Siehe, ich habe dich über ganz Ägyptenland gesetzt.
Und er tat seinen Ring von seiner Hand und gab ihn Josef an seine Hand und kleidete ihn mit kostbarer Leinwand und legte ihm eine goldene Kette um seinen Hals
und lie&szlig; ihn auf seinem zweiten Wagen fahren und lie&szlig; vor ihm her ausrufen: Der ist des Landes Vater! Und setzte ihn über ganz Ägyptenland.
Und der Pharao sprach zu Josef: Ich bin der Pharao, aber ohne deinen Willen soll niemand seine Hand oder seinen Fu&szlig; regen in ganz Ägyptenland.
Und er nannte ihn Zafenat-Paneach und gab ihm zur Frau Asenat, die Tochter Potiferas, des Priesters zu On.
Und Josef war drei&szlig;ig Jahre alt, als er vor dem Pharao stand, dem König von Ägypten. Und er ging hinweg vom Pharao und zog durch ganz Ägyptenland.
[Note: Josefs Fürsorge für Ägypten. Die Geburt seiner Söhne]Und das Land trug in den sieben reichen Jahren die Fülle.
Und Josef sammelte die ganze Ernte der sieben Jahre, da Überflu&szlig; im Lande Ägypten war, und tat sie in die Städte. Was an Getreide auf dem Felde rings um eine jede Stadt wuchs, das tat er hinein.
So schüttete Josef das Getreide auf, über die Ma&szlig;en viel wie Sand am Meer, so da&szlig; er aufhörte zu zählen; denn man konnte es nicht zählen.
Und Josef wurden zwei Söhne geboren, bevor die Hungerzeit kam; die gebar ihm Asenat, die Tochter Potiferas, des Priesters zu On.
Und er nannte den ersten Manasse; denn Gott, sprach er, hat mich vergessen lassen all mein Unglück und mein ganzes Vaterhaus.
Den andern nannte er Ephraim; denn Gott, sprach er, hat mich wachsen lassen in dem Lande meines Elends.
Als nun die sieben reichen Jahre um waren im Lande Ägypten,
da fingen an die sieben Hungerjahre zu kommen, wie Josef gesagt hatte. Und es ward eine Hungersnot in allen Landen, aber in ganz Ägyptenland war Brot.
Als nun ganz Ägyptenland auch Hunger litt, schrie das Volk zum Pharao um Brot. Aber der Pharao sprach zu allen Ägyptern: Geht hin zu Josef; was der euch sagt, das tut.
Als nun im ganzen Lande Hungersnot war, tat Josef alle Kornhäuser auf und verkaufte den Ägyptern; denn der Hunger ward je länger je grö&szlig;er im Lande.
Und alle Welt kam nach Ägypten, um bei Josef zu kaufen; denn der Hunger war gro&szlig; in allen Landen. 
</P><hr><h3>42. Kapitel</h3><h3>Erste Reise der Söhne Jakobs nach Ägypten</h3>
<p>Als aber Jakob sah, da&szlig; Getreide in Ägypten zu haben war, sprach er zu seinen Söhnen: Was seht ihr euch lange an?
Siehe, ich höre, es sei in Ägypten Getreide zu haben; zieht hinab und kauft uns Getreide, da&szlig; wir leben und nicht sterben.
Da zogen hinab zehn Brüder Josefs, um in Ägypten Getreide zu kaufen.
Aber den Benjamin, Josefs Bruder, lie&szlig; Jakob nicht mit seinen Brüdern ziehen; denn er sprach: Es könnte ihm ein Unfall begegnen.
So kamen die Söhne Israels, Getreide zu kaufen, samt andern, die mit ihnen zogen; denn es war auch im Lande Kanaan Hungersnot.
Aber Josef war der Regent im Lande und verkaufte Getreide allem Volk im Lande. Als nun seine Brüder kamen, fielen sie vor ihm nieder zur Erde auf ihr Antlitz.
Und er sah sie an und erkannte sie, aber er stellte sich fremd gegen sie und redete hart mit ihnen und sprach zu ihnen: Woher kommt ihr? Sie sprachen: Aus dem Lande Kanaan, Getreide zu kaufen.
Aber wiewohl er sie erkannte, erkannten sie ihn doch nicht.
Und Josef dachte an die Träume, die er von ihnen geträumt hatte, und sprach zu ihnen: Ihr seid Kundschafter und seid gekommen zu sehen, wo das Land offen ist.
Sie antworteten ihm: Nein, mein Herr! Deine Knechte sind gekommen, Getreide zu kaufen.
Wir sind alle eines Mannes Söhne; wir sind redlich, und deine Knechte sind nie Kundschafter gewesen.
Er sprach zu ihnen: Nein, sondern ihr seid gekommen zu sehen, wo das Land offen ist.
Sie antworteten ihm: Wir, deine Knechte, sind zwölf Brüder, eines Mannes Söhne im Lande Kanaan, und der jüngste ist noch bei unserm Vater, aber der eine ist nicht mehr vorhanden.
Josef sprach zu ihnen: Es ist, wie ich euch gesagt habe: Kundschafter seid ihr.
Daran will ich euch prüfen: So wahr der Pharao lebt: ihr sollt nicht von hier wegkommen, es komme denn her euer jüngster Bruder!
Sendet einen von euch hin, der euren Bruder hole, ihr aber sollt gefangen sein. Daran will ich prüfen eure Rede, ob ihr mit Wahrheit umgeht. Andernfalls - so wahr der Pharao lebt! - seid ihr Kundschafter!
Und er lie&szlig; sie zusammen in Gewahrsam legen drei Tage lang.
Am dritten Tage aber sprach er zu ihnen: Wollt ihr leben, so tut nun dies, denn ich fürchte Gott:
Seid ihr redlich, so la&szlig;t einen eurer Brüder gebunden liegen in eurem Gefängnis; ihr aber zieht hin und bringt heim, was ihr gekauft habt für den Hunger.
Und bringt euren jüngsten Bruder zu mir, so will ich euren Worten glauben, so da&szlig; ihr nicht sterben mü&szlig;t. Und sie gingen darauf ein.
Sie sprachen aber untereinander: Das haben wir an unserem Bruder verschuldet! Denn wir sahen die Angst seiner Seele, als er uns anflehte, und wir wollten ihn nicht erhören; darum kommt nun diese Trübsal über uns.
Ruben antwortete ihnen und sprach: Sagte ich's euch nicht, als ich sprach: Versündigt euch nicht an dem Knaben, doch ihr wolltet nicht hören? Nun wird sein Blut gefordert.
Sie wu&szlig;ten aber nicht, da&szlig; es Josef verstand; denn er redete mit ihnen durch einen Dolmetscher.
Und er wandte sich von ihnen und weinte. Als er sich nun wieder zu ihnen wandte und mit ihnen redete, nahm er aus ihrer Mitte Simeon und lie&szlig; ihn binden vor ihren Augen.
Und Josef gab Befehl, ihre Säcke mit Getreide zu füllen und ihnen ihr Geld wiederzugeben, einem jeden in seinen Sack, dazu auch Zehrung auf den Weg; und so tat man ihnen.
Und sie luden ihre Ware auf ihre Esel und zogen von dannen.
Als aber einer seinen Sack auftat, da&szlig; er seinem Esel Futter gäbe in der Herberge, sah er sein Geld, das oben im Sack lag,
und sprach zu seinen Brüdern: Mein Geld ist wieder da, siehe, in meinem Sack ist es! Da entfiel ihnen ihr Herz, und sie blickten einander erschrocken an und sprachen: Warum hat Gott uns das angetan?
Als sie nun heimkamen zu ihrem Vater Jakob ins Land Kanaan, sagten sie ihm alles, was ihnen begegnet war, und sprachen:
Der Mann, der im Lande Herr ist, redete hart mit uns und hielt uns für Kundschafter.
Und wir antworteten ihm: Wir sind redlich und nie Kundschafter gewesen,
sondern zwölf Brüder, unseres Vaters Söhne; einer ist nicht mehr vorhanden, und der jüngste ist noch bei unserm Vater im Lande Kanaan.
Da sprach der Herr im Lande zu uns: Daran will ich merken, ob ihr redlich seid: einen eurer Brüder la&szlig;t bei mir und nehmt für euer Haus, wieviel ihr bedürft, und zieht hin
und bringt euren jüngsten Bruder zu mir, so merke ich, da&szlig; ihr nicht Kundschafter, sondern redlich seid; dann will ich euch auch euren Bruder wiedergeben, und ihr mögt im Lande Handel treiben.
Und als sie die Säcke ausschütteten, fand ein jeder seinen Beutel Geld in seinem Sack. Und als sie sahen, da&szlig; es die Beutel mit ihrem Geld waren, erschraken sie samt ihrem Vater.
Da sprach Jakob, ihr Vater, zu ihnen: Ihr beraubt mich meiner Kinder! Josef ist nicht mehr da, Simeon ist nicht mehr da, Benjamin wollt ihr auch wegnehmen; es geht alles über mich.
Ruben antwortete seinem Vater und sprach: Wenn ich ihn dir nicht wiederbringe, so töte meine zwei Söhne. Gib ihn nur in meine Hand, ich will ihn dir wiederbringen.
Er sprach: Mein Sohn soll nicht mit euch hinabziehen; denn sein Bruder ist tot, und er ist allein übriggeblieben. Wenn ihm ein Unfall auf dem Wege begegnete, den ihr reiset, würdet ihr meine grauen Haare mit Herzeleid hinunter zu den Toten bringen. 
</P><hr><h3>43. Kapitel</h3><h3>Zweite Reise der Söhne Jakobs nach Ägypten</h3>
<p>Die Hungersnot aber drückte das Land.
Und als verzehrt war, was sie an Getreide aus Ägypten gebracht hatten, sprach ihr Vater zu ihnen: Zieht wieder hin und kauft uns ein wenig Getreide.
Da antwortete ihm Juda und sprach: Der Mann schärfte uns das hart ein und sprach: Ihr sollt mein Angesicht nicht sehen, es sei denn euer Bruder mit euch.
Willst du nun unsern Bruder mit uns senden, so wollen wir hinabziehen und dir zu essen kaufen.
Willst du ihn aber nicht senden, so ziehen wir nicht hinab. Denn der Mann hat zu uns gesagt: Ihr sollt mein Angesicht nicht sehen, euer Bruder sei denn mit euch.
Israel sprach: Warum habt ihr so übel an mir getan, da&szlig; ihr dem Mann sagtet, da&szlig; ihr noch einen Bruder habt?
Sie antworteten: Der Mann forschte so genau nach uns und unserer Verwandtschaft und sprach: Lebt euer Vater noch? Habt ihr auch noch einen Bruder? Da antworteten wir ihm, wie er uns fragte. Wie konnten wir wissen, da&szlig; er sagen würde: Bringt euren Bruder mit herab?
Da sprach Juda zu Israel, seinem Vater: La&szlig; den Knaben mit mir ziehen, da&szlig; wir uns aufmachen und reisen und leben und nicht sterben, wir und du und unsere Kinder.
Ich will Bürge für ihn sein; von meinen Händen sollst du ihn fordern. Wenn ich ihn dir nicht wiederbringe und vor deine Augen stelle, so will ich mein Leben lang die Schuld tragen.
Denn wenn wir nicht gezögert hätten, wären wir wohl schon zweimal wiedergekommen.
Da sprach Israel, ihr Vater, zu ihnen: Wenn es denn so ist, wohlan so tut's und nehmt von des Landes besten Früchten in eure Säcke und bringt dem Manne Geschenke hinab, ein wenig Balsam und Honig, Harz und Myrrhe, Nüsse und Mandeln.
Nehmt auch anderes Geld mit euch, und das Geld, das ihr obenauf in euren Säcken wiederbekommen habt, bringt auch wieder hin. Vielleicht ist ein Irrtum da geschehen.
Dazu nehmt euren Bruder, macht euch auf und geht wieder zu dem Manne.
Aber der allmächtige Gott gebe euch Barmherzigkeit vor dem Manne, da&szlig; er mit euch ziehen lasse euren andern Bruder und Benjamin. Ich aber mu&szlig; sein wie einer, der seiner Kinder ganz und gar beraubt ist.
Da nahmen sie diese Geschenke und das doppelte Geld mit sich, dazu Benjamin, machten sich auf, zogen nach Ägypten und traten vor Josef.
Als Josef sie sah mit Benjamin, sprach er zu seinem Haushalter: Führe diese Männer ins Haus und schlachte und richte zu, denn sie sollen zu Mittag mit mir essen.
Und der Mann tat, wie ihm Josef gesagt hatte, und führte die Männer in Josefs Haus.
Sie fürchteten sich aber, weil sie in Josefs Haus geführt wurden, und sprachen: Wir sind hereingeführt um des Geldes willen, das wir in unsern Säcken das vorige Mal wiedergefunden haben; man will auf uns eindringen und über uns herfallen und uns zu Sklaven machen und uns die Esel nehmen.
Darum traten sie zu Josefs Haushalter und redeten mit ihm vor der Haustür
und sprachen: Mein Herr, wir sind das vorige Mal herabgezogen, Getreide zu kaufen,
und als wir in die Herberge kamen und unsere Säcke auftaten, siehe, da war eines jeden Geld oben in seinem Sack mit vollem Gewicht. Darum haben wir's wieder mit uns gebracht,
haben auch anderes Geld mit uns herabgebracht, Getreide zu kaufen. Wir wissen aber nicht, wer uns unser Geld in unsere Säcke gesteckt hat.
Er aber sprach: Seid guten Mutes, fürchtet euch nicht! Euer Gott und eures Vaters Gott hat euch einen Schatz gegeben in eure Säcke. Euer Geld habe ich erhalten. Und er führte Simeon zu ihnen heraus
und brachte sie in Josefs Haus, gab ihnen Wasser, da&szlig; sie ihre Fü&szlig;e wuschen, und gab ihren Eseln Futter.
Sie aber richteten das Geschenk zu, bis Josef mittags käme; denn sie hatten gehört, da&szlig; sie dort essen sollten.
Als nun Josef ins Haus trat, brachten sie ihm das Geschenk ins Haus, das sie mitgebracht hatten, und fielen vor ihm nieder zur Erde.
Er aber grü&szlig;te sie freundlich und sprach: Geht es eurem alten Vater gut, von dem ihr mir sagtet? Lebt er noch?
Sie antworteten: Es geht deinem Knechte, unserm Vater, gut, und er lebt noch. Und sie verneigten sich und fielen vor ihm nieder.
Und er hob seine Augen auf und sah seinen Bruder Benjamin, seiner Mutter Sohn, und sprach: Ist das euer jüngster Bruder, von dem ihr mir sagtet? Und sprach weiter: Gott sei dir gnädig, mein Sohn!
Und Josef eilte hinaus; denn sein Herz entbrannte ihm gegen seinen Bruder, und er suchte, wo er weinen könnte, und ging in seine Kammer und weinte daselbst.
Und als er sein Angesicht gewaschen hatte, ging er heraus und hielt an sich und sprach: Legt die Speisen auf!
Und man trug ihm besonders auf und jenen auch besonders und den Ägyptern, die mit ihm a&szlig;en, auch besonders. Denn die Ägypter dürfen nicht essen mit den Hebräern; denn es ist ein Greuel für sie.
Und man setzte sie ihm gegenüber, den Erstgeborenen nach seiner Erstgeburt und den Jüngsten nach seiner Jugend. Darüber verwunderten sie sich untereinander.
Und man trug ihnen Essen auf von seinem Tisch, aber Benjamin bekam fünfmal mehr als die andern. Und sie tranken und wurden fröhlich mit ihm. 
</P><hr><h3>44. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josefs Brüder werden hart geängstigt</h3>
<p>Und Josef befahl seinem Haushalter und sprach: Fülle den Männern ihre Säcke mit Getreide, soviel sie fortbringen, und lege jedem sein Geld oben in seinen Sack.
Und meinen silbernen Becher lege oben in des Jüngsten Sack mit dem Gelde für das Getreide. Der tat, wie ihm Josef gesagt hatte.
Am Morgen, als es licht ward, lie&szlig;en sie die Männer ziehen mit ihren Eseln.
Als sie aber zur Stadt hinaus waren und noch nicht weit gekommen, sprach Josef zu seinem Haushalter: Auf, jage den Männern nach, und wenn du sie ereilst, so sprich zu ihnen: Warum habt ihr Gutes mit Bösem vergolten?
Warum habt ihr den silbernen Becher gestohlen? Ist das nicht der, aus dem mein Herr trinkt und aus dem er wahrsagt? Ihr habt übel getan.
Und als er sie ereilte, redete er mit ihnen diese Worte.
Sie antworteten ihm: Warum redet mein Herr solche Worte? Es sei ferne von deinen Knechten, solches zu tun.
Siehe, das Geld, das wir fanden oben in unseren Säcken, haben wir wiedergebracht zu dir aus dem Lande Kanaan. Wie sollten wir da aus deines Herrn Hause Silber oder Gold gestohlen haben?
Bei wem er gefunden wird unter deinen Knechten, der sei des Todes; dazu wollen auch wir meines Herrn Sklaven sein.
Er sprach: Ja, es sei, wie ihr geredet habt. Bei wem er gefunden wird, der sei mein Sklave, ihr aber sollt frei sein.
Und sie legten eilends ein jeder seinen Sack ab auf die Erde, und ein jeder tat seinen Sack auf.
Und er suchte und fing an beim Ältesten bis hin zum Jüngsten. Da fand sich der Becher in Benjamins Sack.
Da zerrissen sie ihre Kleider, und ein jeder belud seinen Esel, und sie zogen wieder in die Stadt.
Und Juda ging mit seinen Brüdern in Josefs Haus, denn er war noch dort. Und sie fielen vor ihm nieder auf die Erde.
Josef aber sprach zu ihnen: Wie habt ihr das tun können? Wu&szlig;tet ihr nicht, da&szlig; ein solcher Mann, wie ich bin, wahrsagen kann?
Juda sprach: Was sollen wir meinem Herrn sagen, oder wie sollen wir reden, und womit können wir uns rechtfertigen? Gott hat die Missetat deiner Knechte gefunden. Siehe, wir und der, bei dem der Becher gefunden ist, sind meines Herrn Sklaven.
Er aber sprach: Das sei ferne von mir, solches zu tun! Der, bei dem der Becher gefunden ist, soll mein Sklave sein; ihr aber zieht hinauf mit Frieden zu eurem Vater.
Da trat Juda zu ihm und sprach: Mein Herr, la&szlig; deinen Knecht ein Wort reden vor den Ohren meines Herrn, und dein Zorn entbrenne nicht über deinen Knecht, denn du bist wie der Pharao.
Mein Herr fragte seine Knechte und sprach: Habt ihr noch einen Vater oder Bruder?a
Da antworteten wir: Wir haben einen Vater, der ist alt, und einen jungen Knaben, in seinem Alter geboren, und sein Bruder ist tot, und er ist allein übriggeblieben von seiner Mutter, und sein Vater hat ihn lieb.
Da sprachst du zu deinen Knechten: Bringt ihn herab zu mir, ich will ihm Gnade erweisen.
Wir aber antworteten meinem Herrn: Der Knabe kann seinen Vater nicht verlassen; wenn er ihn verlie&szlig;e, würde der sterben.
Da sprachst du zu deinen Knechten: Wenn euer jüngster Bruder nicht mit euch herkommt, sollt ihr mein Angesicht nicht mehr sehen.
Da zogen wir hinauf zu deinem Knecht, meinem Vater, und sagten ihm meines Herrn Rede.
Da sprach unser Vater: Zieht wieder hin und kauft uns ein wenig Getreide.
Wir aber sprachen: Wir können nicht hinabziehen; nur wenn unser jüngster Bruder mit uns ist, wollen wir hinabziehen; denn wir dürfen des Mannes Angesicht nicht sehen, wenn unser jüngster Bruder nicht mit uns ist.
Da sprach dein Knecht, mein Vater, zu uns: Ihr wi&szlig;t, da&szlig; mir meine Frau zwei Söhne geboren hat;
einer ging von mir, und ich mu&szlig;te mir sagen: Er ist zerrissen. Und ich hab ihn nicht gesehen bisher.
Werdet ihr diesen auch von mir nehmen und widerfährt ihm ein Unfall, so werdet ihr meine grauen Haare mit Jammer hinunter zu den Toten bringen.
Nun, wenn ich heimkäme zu deinem Knecht, meinem Vater, und der Knabe wäre nicht mit uns, an dem er mit ganzer Seele hängt,
so wird's geschehen, da&szlig; er stirbt, wenn er sieht, da&szlig; der Knabe nicht da ist. So würden wir, deine Knechte, die grauen Haare deines Knechtes, unseres Vaters, mit Herzeleid hinunter zu den Toten bringen.
Denn ich, dein Knecht, bin Bürge geworden für den Knaben vor meinem Vater und sprach: Bringe ich ihn dir nicht wieder, so will ich mein Leben lang die Schuld tragen.
Darum la&szlig; deinen Knecht hier bleiben an des Knaben Statt als Sklaven meines Herrn und den Knaben mit seinen Brüdern hinaufziehen.
Denn wie soll ich hinaufziehen zu meinem Vater, wenn der Knabe nicht mit mir ist? Ich könnte den Jammer nicht sehen, der über meinen Vater kommen würde. 
</P><hr><h3>45. Kapitel</h3><h3>Josef gibt sich seinen Brüdern zu erkennen</h3>
<p>Da konnte Josef nicht länger an sich halten vor allen, die um ihn her standen, und er rief: La&szlig;t jedermann von mir hinausgehen! Und stand kein Mensch bei ihm, als sich Josef seinen Brüdern zu erkennen gab.
Und er weinte laut, da&szlig; es die Ägypter und das Haus des Pharao hörten,
und sprach zu seinen Brüdern: Ich bin Josef. Lebt mein Vater noch? Und seine Brüder konnten ihm nicht antworten, so erschraken sie vor seinem Angesicht.
Er aber sprach zu seinen Brüdern: Tretet doch her zu mir! Und sie traten herzu. Und er sprach: Ich bin Josef, euer Bruder, den ihr nach Ägypten verkauft habt.
Und nun bekümmert euch nicht und denkt nicht, da&szlig; ich darum zürne, da&szlig; ihr mich hierher verkauft habt; denn um eures Lebens willen hat mich Gott vor euch hergesandt.
Denn es sind nun zwei Jahre, da&szlig; Hungersnot im Lande ist, und sind noch fünf Jahre, da&szlig; weder Pflügen noch Ernten sein wird.
Aber Gott hat mich vor euch hergesandt, da&szlig; er euch übriglasse auf Erden und euer Leben erhalte zu einer gro&szlig;en Errettung.
Und nun, ihr habt mich nicht hergesandt, sondern Gott; der hat mich dem Pharao zum Vater gesetzt und zum Herrn über sein ganzes Haus und zum Herrscher über ganz Ägyptenland.
Eilt nun und zieht hinauf zu meinem Vater und sagt ihm: Das lä&szlig;t dir Josef, dein Sohn, sagen: Gott hat mich zum Herrn über ganz Ägypten gesetzt; komm herab zu mir, säume nicht!
Du sollst im Lande Goschen wohnen und nahe bei mir sein, du und deine Kinder und deine Kindeskinder, dein Kleinvieh und Gro&szlig;vieh und alles, was du hast.
Ich will dich dort versorgen, denn es sind noch fünf Jahre Hungersnot, damit du nicht verarmst mit deinem Hause und allem, was du hast.
Siehe, eure Augen sehen es und die Augen meines Bruders Benjamin, da&szlig; ich leibhaftig mit euch rede.
Verkündet meinem Vater alle meine Herrlichkeit in Ägypten und alles, was ihr gesehen habt; eilt und kommt herab mit meinem Vater hierher.
Und er fiel seinem Bruder Benjamin um den Hals und weinte, und Benjamin weinte auch an seinem Halse,
und er kü&szlig;te alle seine Brüder und weinte an ihrer Brust. Danach redeten seine Brüder mit ihm.
Und als das Gerücht kam in des Pharao Haus, da&szlig; Josefs Brüder gekommen wären, gefiel es dem Pharao gut und allen seinen Gro&szlig;en.
Und der Pharao sprach zu Josef: Sage deinen Brüdern: Macht es so: Beladet eure Tiere, ziehet hin!
Und wenn ihr ins Land Kanaan kommt, so nehmt euren Vater und alle die Euren und kommt zu mir; ich will euch das Beste geben in Ägyptenland, da&szlig; ihr essen sollt das Fett des Landes.
Und gebiete ihnen: Macht es so: Nehmt mit euch aus Ägyptenland Wagen für eure Kinder und Frauen und bringt euren Vater mit und kommt.
Und seht euren Hausrat nicht an; denn das Beste des ganzen Landes Ägypten soll euer sein.
Die Söhne Israels taten so. Und Josef gab ihnen Wagen nach dem Befehl des Pharao und Zehrung auf den Weg
und gab ihnen allen, einem jeden ein Feierkleid, aber Benjamin gab er dreihundert Silberstücke und fünf Feierkleider.
Und seinem Vater sandte er zehn Esel, mit dem Besten aus Ägypten beladen, und zehn Eselinnen mit Getreide und Brot und mit Zehrung für seinen Vater auf den Weg.
Damit entlie&szlig; er seine Brüder, und sie zogen hin. Und er sprach zu ihnen: Zanket nicht auf dem Wege!
So zogen sie hinauf von Ägypten und kamen ins Land Kanaan zu ihrem Vater Jakob
und verkündeten ihm und sprachen: Josef lebt noch und ist Herr über ganz Ägyptenland! Aber sein Herz blieb kalt, denn er glaubte ihnen nicht.
Da sagten sie ihm alle Worte Josefs, die er zu ihnen gesagt hatte. Und als er die Wagen sah, die ihm Josef gesandt hatte, um ihn zu holen, wurde der Geist Jakobs, ihres Vaters, lebendig.
Und Israel sprach: Mir ist genug, da&szlig; mein Sohn Josef noch lebt; ich will hin und ihn sehen, ehe ich sterbe. 
</P><hr><h3>46. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Reise nach Ägypten. Seine Kinder und Enkel</h3>
<p>Israel zog hin mit allem, was er hatte. Und als er nach Beerscheba kam, brachte er Opfer dar dem Gott seines Vaters Isaak.
Und Gott sprach zu ihm des Nachts in einer Offenbarung: Jakob, Jakob! Er sprach: Hier bin ich.
Und er sprach: Ich bin Gott, der Gott deines Vaters; fürchte dich nicht, nach Ägypten hinabzuziehen; denn daselbst will ich dich zum gro&szlig;en Volk machen.
Ich will mit dir hinab nach Ägypten ziehen und will dich auch wieder heraufführen, und Josef soll dir mit seinen Händen die Augen zudrücken.
Da machte sich Jakob auf von Beerscheba. Und die Söhne Israels hoben Jakob, ihren Vater, mit ihren Kindern und Frauen auf die Wagen, die der Pharao gesandt hatte, um ihn zu holen,
und nahmen ihr Vieh und ihre Habe, die sie im Lande Kanaan erworben hatten, und kamen so nach Ägypten, Jakob und sein ganzes Geschlecht mit ihm.
Seine Söhne und seine Enkel, seine Töchter und seine Enkelinnen und seine ganze Nachkommenschaft brachte er mit sich nach Ägypten.
Dies sind die Namen der Söhne Israels, die nach Ägypten kamen: Jakob und seine Söhne. Der erstgeborene Sohn Jakobs: Ruben.
Die Söhne Rubens: Henoch, Pallu, Hezron und Karmi.
Die Söhne Simeons: Jemuël, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar und Schaul, der Sohn der Kanaaniterin.
Die Söhne Levis: Gerschon, Kehat und Merari.
Die Söhne Judas: Er, Onan, Schela, Perez und Serach. Aber Er und Onan waren gestorben im Lande Kanaan. Die Söhne aber des Perez: Hezron und Hamul.
Die Söhne Issachars: Tola, Puwa, Jaschub und Schimron.
Die Söhne Sebulons: Sered, Elon und Jachleel.
Das sind die Söhne der Lea, die sie Jakob gebar in Mesopotamien, dazu seine Tochter Dina. Die machen zusammen mit ihren Söhnen und Töchtern dreiunddrei&szlig;ig Seelen.
Die Söhne Gads: Zifjon, Haggi, Schuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arod und Areli.
Die Söhne Assers: Jimna, Jischwa, Jischwi, Beri, dazu Serach, ihre Schwester; und die Söhne Berias: Heber und Malkïl.
Das sind die Söhne der Silpa, die Laban seiner Tochter Lea gegeben hatte, und sie gebar Jakob diese sechzehn Seelen.
Die Söhne Rahels, der Frau Jakobs: Josef und Benjamin.
Und dem Josef wurden geboren in Ägyptenland Manasse und Ephraim, die ihm Asenat gebar, die Tochter Potiferas, des Priesters zu On.
Die Söhne Benjamins: Bela, Becher, Aschbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosch, Muppim, Huppim und Ard.
Das sind die Söhne der Rahel, die Jakob geboren wurden, zusammen vierzehn Seelen.
Der Sohn Dans: Schuham.
Die Söhne Naftalis: Jachzeel, Guni, Jezer und Schillem.
Das sind die Söhne der Bilha, die Laban seiner Tochter Rahel gegeben hatte, und sie gebar Jakob diese sieben Seelen.
Alle Seelen, die mit Jakob nach Ägypten kamen, seine Nachkommen - ausgenommen die Frauen seiner Söhne - sind alle zusammen sechsundsechzig Seelen.
Die Söhne Josefs, die in Ägypten geboren sind, waren zwei Seelen; so da&szlig; alle Seelen des Hauses Jakobs, die nach Ägypten kamen, waren siebzig.
[Note: Jakobs Wiedersehen mit Josef]Und Jakob sandte Juda vor sich her zu Josef, da&szlig; dieser ihm Goschen anwiese. Als sie in das Land Goschen kamen,
spannte Josef seinen Wagen an und zog hinauf seinem Vater Israel entgegen nach Goschen. Und als er ihn sah, fiel er ihm um den Hals und weinte lange an seinem Halse.
Da sprach Israel zu Josef: Ich will nun gerne sterben, nachdem ich dein Angesicht gesehen habe, da&szlig; du noch lebst.
Josef sprach zu seinen Brüdern und zu seines Vaters Hause: Ich will hinaufziehen und dem Pharao ansagen und zu ihm sprechen: Meine Brüder und meines Vaters Haus sind zu mir gekommen aus dem Lande Kanaan
und sind Viehhirten, denn es sind Leute, die Vieh haben; ihr Kleinvieh und Gro&szlig;vieh und alles, was sie haben, haben sie mitgebracht.
Wenn euch nun der Pharao wird rufen und sagen: Was ist euer Gewerbe?
so sollt ihr sagen: Deine Knechte sind Leute, die Vieh haben, von unserer Jugend an bis jetzt, wir und unsere Väter-, damit ihr wohnen dürft im Lande Goschen. Denn alle Viehhirten sind den Ägyptern ein Greuel. 
</P><hr><h3>47. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakob vor dem Pharao</h3>
<p>Da kam Josef und sagte es dem Pharao an und sprach: Mein Vater und meine Brüder, ihr Kleinvieh und Gro&szlig;vieh und alles, was sie haben, sind gekommen aus dem Lande Kanaan, und siehe, sie sind im Lande Goschen.
Und er nahm von allen seinen Brüdern fünf und stellte sie vor den Pharao.
Da sprach der Pharao zu seinen Brüdern: Was ist euer Gewerbe? Sie antworteten: Deine Knechte sind Viehhirten, wir und unsere Väter.
Und sagten weiter zum Pharao: Wir sind gekommen, bei euch zu wohnen im Lande; denn deine Knechte haben nicht Weide für ihr Vieh, so hart drückt die Hungersnot das Land Kanaan. So la&szlig; doch nun deine Knechte im Land Goschen wohnen.
Der Pharao sprach zu Josef: Es ist dein Vater, und es sind deine Brüder, die zu dir gekommen sind.
Das Land Ägypten steht dir offen, la&szlig; sie am besten Ort des Landes wohnen, la&szlig; sie im Lande Goschen wohnen, und wenn du wei&szlig;t, da&szlig; Leute unter ihnen sind, die tüchtig sind, so setze sie über mein Vieh.
Josef brachte auch seinen Vater Jakob hinein und stellte ihn vor den Pharao. Und Jakob segnete den Pharao.
Der Pharao aber fragte Jakob: Wie alt bist du?
Jakob sprach zum Pharao: Die Zeit meiner Wanderschaft ist hundertunddrei&szlig;ig Jahre; wenig und böse ist die Zeit meines Lebens und reicht nicht heran an die Zeit meiner Väter in ihrer Wanderschaft.
Und Jakob segnete den Pharao und ging hinaus von ihm.
Aber Josef lie&szlig; seinen Vater und seine Brüder in Ägyptenland wohnen und gab ihnen Besitz am besten Ort des Landes, im Lande Ramses, wie der Pharao geboten hatte.
Und er versorgte seinen Vater und seine Brüder und das ganze Haus seines Vaters mit Brot, einen jeden nach der Zahl seiner Kinder.
[Note: Die Ägypter verkaufen ihre Habe und sich selbst dem Pharao]Es war aber kein Brot im ganzen Lande; denn die Hungersnot war sehr schwer, so da&szlig; Ägypten und Kanaan verschmachteten vor Hunger.
Und Josef brachte alles Geld zusammen, das in Ägypten und Kanaan gefunden wurde, für das Getreide, das sie kauften; und er tat alles Geld in das Haus des Pharao.
Als es nun an Geld gebrach im Lande Ägypten und in Kanaan, kamen alle Ägypter zu Josef und sprachen: Schaffe uns Brot! Warum lä&szlig;t du uns vor dir sterben, nun wir ohne Geld sind?
Josef sprach: Schafft euer Vieh her, so will ich euch Brot als Entgelt für das Vieh geben, weil ihr ohne Geld seid.
Da brachten sie Josef ihr Vieh, und er gab ihnen Brot als Entgelt für ihre Pferde, Schafe, Rinder und Esel. So ernährte er sie mit Brot das Jahr hindurch für all ihr Vieh.
Als das Jahr um war, kamen sie zu ihm im zweiten Jahr und sprachen zu ihm: Wir wollen unserm Herrn nicht verbergen, da&szlig; nicht allein das Geld, sondern auch alles Vieh dahin ist an unsern Herrn, und ist nichts mehr übrig vor unserm Herrn als nur unsere Leiber und unser Feld.
Warum lä&szlig;t du uns vor dir sterben und unser Feld? Kaufe uns und unser Land für Brot, da&szlig; wir und unser Land leibeigen seien dem Pharao; gib uns Korn zur Saat, da&szlig; wir leben und nicht sterben und das Feld nicht wüst werde.
So kaufte Josef dem Pharao das ganze Ägypten. Denn die Ägypter verkauften ein jeder seinen Acker, weil die Hungersnot schwer auf ihnen lag. Und so wurde das Land dem Pharao zu eigen.
Und er machte das Volk leibeigen von einem Ende Ägyptens bis ans andere.
Ausgenommen das Feld der Priester, das kaufte er nicht; denn es war vom Pharao für die Priester verordnet, da&szlig; sie sich nähren sollten von dem Landanteil, den er ihnen gegeben hatte. Darum durften sie ihr Feld nicht verkaufen.
Da sprach Josef zu dem Volk: Siehe, ich hab heute euch und euer Feld für den Pharao gekauft; siehe, da habt ihr Korn zur Saat, und nun besäet das Feld.
Und von dem Getreide sollt ihr den Fünften dem Pharao geben; vier Teile sollen euer sein, das Feld zu besäen und zu eurer Speise und für euer Haus und eure Kinder.
Sie sprachen: Du hast uns beim Leben erhalten; la&szlig; uns nur Gnade finden vor dir, unserm Herrn, dann wollen wir dem Pharao leibeigen sein.
So machte es Josef zum Gesetz bis auf diesen Tag, den Fünften vom Feld der Ägypter dem Pharao zu geben; ausgenommen blieb das Feld der Priester, das wurde nicht dem Pharao zu eigen.
[Note: Jakobs letzter Wunsch]So wohnte Israel in Ägypten im Lande Goschen, und sie hatten es inne und wuchsen und mehrten sich sehr.
Und Jakob lebte siebzehn Jahre in Ägyptenland, da&szlig; sein ganzes Alter wurde hundertundsiebenundvierzig Jahre.
Als nun die Zeit herbeikam, da&szlig; Israel sterben sollte, rief er seinen Sohn Josef und sprach zu ihm: Hab ich Gnade vor dir gefunden, so lege deine Hand unter meine Hüfte, da&szlig; du die Liebe und Treue an mir tust und begrabest mich nicht inÄgypten,
sondern ich will liegen bei meinen Vätern, und du sollst mich aus Ägypten führen und in ihrem Grab begraben. Er sprach: Ich will tun, wie du gesagt hast.
Er aber sprach: So schwöre mir. Und er schwor ihm. Da neigte sich Israel anbetend über das Kopfende des Bettes hin. 
</P><hr><h3>48. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Segen über Ephraim und Manasse</h3>
<p>Danach wurde Josef gesagt: Siehe, dein Vater ist krank. Und er nahm mit sich seine beiden Söhne Manasse und Ephraim.
Da wurde Jakob angesagt: Siehe, dein Sohn Josef kommt zu dir. Und Israel machte sich stark und setzte sich auf im Bett
und sprach zu Josef: Der allmächtige Gott erschien mir zu Lus im Lande Kanaan und segnete mich
und sprach zu mir: Siehe, ich will dich wachsen lassen und mehren und will dich zu einer Menge von Völkern machen und will dies Land zu eigen geben deinen Nachkommen für alle Zeit.
So sollen nun deine beiden Söhne Ephraim und Manasse, die dir geboren sind in Ägyptenland, ehe ich hergekommen bin zu dir, mein sein gleichwie Ruben und Simeon.
Die du aber nach ihnen zeugst, sollen dein sein und genannt werden nach dem Namen ihrer Brüder in deren Erbteil.
Und als ich aus Mesopotamien kam, starb mir Rahel im Land Kanaan auf der Reise, als noch eine Strecke Weges war nach Efrata, und ich begrub sie dort an dem Wege nach Efrata, das nun Bethlehem hei&szlig;t.
Und Israel sah die Söhne Josefs und sprach: Wer sind die?
Josef antwortete seinem Vater: Es sind meine Söhne, die mir Gott hier gegeben hat. Er sprach: Bringe sie her zu mir, da&szlig; ich sie segne.
Denn die Augen Israels waren schwach geworden vor Alter, und er konnte nicht mehr sehen. Und Josef brachte sie zu ihm. Er aber kü&szlig;te sie und herzte sie
und sprach zu Josef: Siehe, ich habe dein Angesicht gesehen, was ich nicht gedacht hätte, und siehe, Gott hat mich auch deine Söhne sehen lassen.
Und Josef nahm sie von seinem Scho&szlig; und verneigte sich vor ihm zur Erde.
Dann nahm sie Josef beide, Ephraim an seine rechte Hand gegenüber Israels linker Hand und Manasse an seine linke Hand gegenüber Israels rechter Hand, und brachte sie zu ihm.
Aber Israel streckte seine rechte Hand aus und legte sie auf Ephraims, des Jüngeren, Haupt und seine linke auf Manasses Haupt und kreuzte seine Arme, obwohl Manasse der Erstgeborene war.
Und er segnete Josef und sprach: Der Gott, vor dem meine Väter Abraham und Isaak gewandelt sind, der Gott, der mein Hirte gewesen ist mein Leben lang bis auf diesen Tag,
der Engel, der mich erlöst hat von allem Übel, der segne die Knaben, da&szlig; durch sie mein und meiner Väter Abraham und Isaak Name fortlebe, da&szlig; sie wachsen und viel werden auf Erden.
Als aber Josef sah, da&szlig; sein Vater die rechte Hand auf Ephraims Haupt legte, mi&szlig;fiel es ihm, und er fa&szlig;te seines Vaters Hand, da&szlig; er sie von Ephraims Haupt auf Manasses Haupt wendete,
und sprach zu ihm: Nicht so, mein Vater, dieser ist der Erstgeborene; lege deine rechte Hand auf sein Haupt.
Aber sein Vater weigerte sich und sprach: Ich wei&szlig; wohl, mein Sohn, ich wei&szlig; wohl. Dieser soll auch ein Volk werden und wird gro&szlig; sein, aber sein jüngerer Bruder wird grö&szlig;er als er werden, und sein Geschlecht wird eine Menge von Völkern werden.
So segnete er sie an jenem Tage und sprach: Wer in Israel jemanden segnen will, der sage: Gott mache dich wie Ephraim und Manasse! Und so setzte er Ephraim vor Manasse.
Und Israel sprach zu Josef: Siehe, ich sterbe; aber Gott wird mit euch sein und wird euch zurückbringen in das Land eurer Väter.
Ich gebe dir ein Stück Land vor deinen Brüdern, das ich mit meinem Schwert und Bogen aus der Hand der Amoriter genommen habe. 
</P><hr><h3>49. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Segen über seine Söhne</h3><h3>(vgl. 5. Mose 33)</h3>
<p>Und Jakob berief seine Söhne und sprach: Versammelt euch, da&szlig; ich euch verkünde, was euch begegnen wird in künftigen Zeiten.
Kommt zuhauf und höret zu, ihr Söhne Jakobs, und höret euren Vater Israel.
Ruben, mein erster Sohn bist du, meine Kraft und der Erstling meiner Stärke, der Oberste in der Würde und der Oberste in der Macht.
Weil du aufwalltest wie Wasser, sollst du nicht der Oberste sein; denn du bist auf deines Vaters Lager gestiegen, daselbst hast du mein Bett entweiht, das du bestiegst.
Die Brüder Simeon und Levi, ihre Schwerter sind mörderische Waffen.
Meine Seele komme nicht in ihren Rat, und mein Herz sei nicht in ihrer Versammlung; denn in ihrem Zorn haben sie Männer gemordet, und in ihrem Mutwillen haben sie Stiere gelähmt.
Verflucht sei ihr Zorn, da&szlig; er so heftig ist, und ihr Grimm, da&szlig; er so grausam ist. Ich will sie versprengen in Jakob und zerstreuen in Israel.
Juda, du bist's! Dich werden deine Brüder preisen. Deine Hand wird deinen Feinden auf dem Nacken sein, vor dir werden deines Vaters Söhne sich verneigen.
Juda ist ein junger Löwe. Du bist hochgekommen, mein Sohn, vom Raube. Wie ein Löwe hat er sich hingestreckt und wie eine Löwin sich gelagert. Wer will ihn aufstören?
Es wird das Zepter von Juda nicht weichen noch der Stab des Herrschers von seinen Fü&szlig;en, bis da&szlig; der Held komme, und ihm werden die Völker anhangen.
Er wird seinen Esel an den Weinstock binden und seiner Eselin Füllen an die edle Rebe. Er wird sein Kleid in Wein waschen und seinen Mantel in Traubenblut.
Seine Augen sind dunkel von Wein und seine Zähne wei&szlig; von Milch.
Sebulon wird am Gestade des Meeres wohnen und am Gestade der Schiffe und reichen bis Sidon.
Issachar wird ein knochiger Esel sein und sich lagern zwischen den Sattelkörben.
Und er sah die Ruhe, da&szlig; sie gut ist, und das Land, da&szlig; es lieblich ist; da hat er seine Schultern geneigt, zu tragen, und ist ein fronpflichtiger Knecht geworden.
Dan wird Richter sein in seinem Volk wie nur irgend ein Stamm in Israel.
Dan wird eine Schlange werden auf dem Wege und eine Otter auf dem Steige und das Pferd in die Fersen bei&szlig;en, da&szlig; sein Reiter zurückfalle.
HERR, ich warte auf dein Heil!a
Gad wird gedrängt werden von Kriegshaufen, er aber drängt ihnen nach auf der Ferse.
Assers Brot wird fett sein, und er wird leckere Speise wie für Könige geben.
Naftali ist ein schneller Hirsch, er gibt schöne Rede.
Josef wird wachsen, er wird wachsen wie ein Baum an der Quelle, da&szlig; die Zweige emporsteigen über die Mauer.
Und wiewohl ihn die Schützen erzürnen und gegen ihn kämpfen und ihn verfolgen,
so bleibt doch sein Bogen fest und seine Arme und Hände stark durch die Hände des Mächtigen in Jakob, durch ihn, den Hirten und Fels Israels.
Von deines Vaters Gott werde dir geholfen, und von dem Allmächtigen seist du gesegnet mit Segen oben vom Himmel herab, mit Segen von der Flut, die drunten liegt, mit Segen der Brüste und des Mutterleibes.
Die Segnungen deines Vaters waren stärker als die Segnungen der ewigen Berge, die köstlichen Güter der ewigen Hügel. Mögen sie kommen auf das Haupt Josefs und auf den Scheitel des Geweihten unter seinen Brüdern!
Benjamin ist ein rei&szlig;ender Wolf; des Morgens wird er Raub fressen und des Abends wird er Beute austeilen.
Das sind die zwölf Stämme Israels alle, und das ist's, was ihr Vater zu ihnen geredet hat, als er sie segnete, einen jeden mit einem besonderen Segen.
[Note: Jakobs Tod]Und Jakob gebot ihnen und sprach zu ihnen: Ich werde versammelt zu meinem Volk; begrabt mich bei meinen Vätern in der Höhle auf dem Acker Efrons, des Hetiters,
in der Höhle auf dem Felde von Machpela, die östlich von Mamre liegt im Lande Kanaan, die Abraham kaufte samt dem Acker von Efron, dem Hetiter, zum Erbbegräbnis.
Da haben sie Abraham begraben und Sara, seine Frau. Da haben sie auch Isaak begraben und Rebekka, seine Frau. Da habe ich auch Lea begraben,
in dem Acker und der Höhle, die von den Hetitern gekauft ist.
Und als Jakob dies Gebot an seine Söhne vollendet hatte, tat er seine Fü&szlig;e zusammen auf dem Bett und verschied und wurde versammelt zu seinen Vätern. 
</P><hr><h3>50. Kapitel</h3><h3>Jakobs Bestattung</h3>
<p>Da warf sich Josef über seines Vaters Angesicht und weinte über ihm und kü&szlig;te ihn.
Und Josef befahl seinen Dienern, den Ärzten, da&szlig; sie seinen Vater zum Begräbnis salbten. Und die Ärzte salbten Israel,
bis vierzig Tage um waren; denn so lange währen die Tage der Salbung. Und die Ägypter beweinten ihn siebzig Tage.
Als nun die Trauertage vorüber waren, redete Josef mit den Leuten des Pharao und sprach: Hab ich Gnade vor euch gefunden, so redet mit dem Pharao und sprecht:
Mein Vater hat einen Eid von mir genommen und gesagt: Siehe, ich sterbe; begrabe mich in meinem Grabe, das ich mir im Lande Kanaan gegraben habe. So will ich nun hinaufziehen und meinen Vater begraben und wiederkommen.
Der Pharao sprach: Zieh hinauf und begrabe deinen Vater, wie du ihm geschworen hast.
Da zog Josef hinauf, seinen Vater zu begraben. Und es zogen mit ihm alle Gro&szlig;en des Pharao, die Ältesten seines Hauses und alle Ältesten des Landes Ägypten,
dazu das ganze Haus Josefs und seine Brüder und die vom Hause seines Vaters. Allein ihre Kinder, Schafe und Rinder lie&szlig;en sie im Lande Goschen.
Und es zogen auch mit ihm hinauf Wagen und Gespanne, und es war ein sehr gro&szlig;es Heer.
Als sie nun nach Goren-Atad kamen, das jenseits des Jordans liegt, da hielten sie eine sehr gro&szlig;e und feierliche Klage. Und Josef hielt Totenklage über seinen Vater sieben Tage.
Und als die Leute im Lande, die Kanaaniter, die Klage bei Goren-Atad sahen, sprachen sie: Die Ägypter halten da gro&szlig;e Klage. Daher nennt man den Ort "Der Ägypter Klage"; er liegt jenseits des Jordans.
Und seine Söhne taten, wie er ihnen befohlen hatte,
und brachten ihn ins Land Kanaan und begruben ihn in der Höhle auf dem Felde von Machpela, die Abraham gekauft hatte mit dem Acker zum Erbbegräbnis von Efron, dem Hetiter, gegenüber Mamre.
Als sie ihn nun begraben hatten, zog Josef wieder nach Ägypten mit seinen Brüdern und mit allen, die mit ihm hinaufgezogen waren, seinen Vater zu begraben.
[Note: Josefs Edelmut und sein Tod]Die Brüder Josefs aber fürchteten sich, als ihr Vater gestorben war, und sprachen: Josef könnte uns gram sein und uns alle Bosheit vergelten, die wir an ihm getan haben.
Darum lie&szlig;en sie ihm sagen: Dein Vater befahl vor seinem Tode und sprach:
So sollt ihr zu Josef sagen: Vergib doch deinen Brüdern die Missetat und ihre Sünde, da&szlig; sie so übel an dir getan haben. Nun vergib doch diese Missetat uns, den Dienern des Gottes deines Vaters! Aber Josef weinte, als sie solches zu ihm sagten.
Und seine Brüder gingen hin und fielen vor ihm nieder und sprachen: Siehe, wir sind deine Knechte.
Josef aber sprach zu ihnen: Fürchtet euch nicht! Stehe ich denn an Gottes Statt?
Ihr gedachtet es böse mit mir zu machen, aber Gott gedachte es gut zu machen, um zu tun, was jetzt am Tage ist, nämlich am Leben zu erhalten ein gro&szlig;es Volk.
So fürchtet euch nun nicht; ich will euch und eure Kinder versorgen. Und er tröstete sie und redete freundlich mit ihnen.
So wohnte Josef in Ägypten mit seines Vaters Hause und lebte hundertundzehn Jahre.
und sah Ephraims Kinder bis ins dritte Glied. Auch die Söhne von Machir, Manasses Sohn, wurden dem Hause Josefs zugerechnet.
Und Josef sprach zu seinen Brüdern: Ich sterbe; aber Gott wird euch gnädig heimsuchen und aus diesem Lande führen in das Land, das er Abraham, Isaak und Jakob zu geben geschworen hat.
Darum nahm er einen Eid von den Söhnen Israels und sprach: Wenn euch Gott heimsuchen wird, so nehmt meine Gebeine mit von hier.
Und Josef starb, als er hundertundzehn Jahre alt war. Und sie salbten ihn und legten ihn in einen Sarg in Ägypten.
Oh hai. In teh beginnin Ceiling Cat maded teh skiez An da Urfs, but he did not eated dem.
Da Urfs no had shapez An haded dark face, An Ceiling Cat rode invisible bike over teh waterz.
An Ceiling Cat sayed light Day An dark no Day. It were FURST!!!1
An Ceiling Cat sayed, i can has teh firmmint wich iz funny bibel naim 4 ceiling, so wuz teh twoth day.
An Ceiling Cat called no waterz urth and waters oshun. Iz good.
An so teh threeth day jazzhands.
An so teh furth day w00t.
An so teh...fith day. Ceiling Cat taek a wile 2 cawnt.
An Ceiling Cat doed moar living stuff, mooes, An creepies, An otehr animuls, An did not eated tehm.
An Ceiling Cat sayed, letz us do peeps like uz, becuz we ish teh qte, An let min p0wnz0r becuz tehy has can openers.
So Ceiling Cat createded teh peeps taht waz like him, can has can openers he maed tehm, min An womin wuz maeded, but he did not eated tehm.
An Ceiling Cat sed them O hai maek bebehs kthx, An p0wn teh waterz, no waterz An teh firmmint, An evry stufs.
For evry createded stufs tehre are the fuudz, to the burdies, teh creepiez, An teh mooes, so tehre. It happen. Iz good.
An Ceiling Cat sayed, Beholdt, teh good enouf for releaze as version 0.8a. kthxbai.
An teh skyz an teh Urfs wur finishd, an al teh stufz in dem, an Ceiling Cat was liek al tired an stuf.
Ceiling Cat blesd teh 7f day, an sed itz teh h0liez0rz; cuz dats when he restd fum all his werk wich Ceiling Cat creatd an maed. Yay holy Caturday!
Iz how teh skyz an Urfs wur maed, wen Ceiling Cat pwnt.
Urfs no can has plantz n treez n catnipz yet, cuz Ceiling Cat no can maek rainz, but iz ok for kittehs DUNT LYKEZ wetfurz. An ther wuznt ne man to mek farmz n stuf; cuz teh clowds wur al happie an dint feel liek cryin, wich wuz ok to cuz umbrellaz wuznt inventd yut.
An Ceiling Cat madez kitteh owt ov teh flore dust, an breathd ntew his nawstrils teh bref ov life, wich wuz sorta liek doin cpr on a mudpie, but it wuz al gud.
An Ceiling Cat madez evry tre dat iz prity, an gud fur fud; teh tre ov lief wuz in teh gardun to, an teh tre ov teh nawlej ov gud an evul. man askd Ceiling Cat to makez a kooki tree, an Ceiling Cat madze it. but he eated it. (no 1 had thot of cheezburgr tre yet.)
An teh naem ov teh 3th rivr iz hiddekel: dat wun runz n frunt ov asyria. An teh 4f rivr iz teh euphrateez (ware teh ppl acused eech oter ov "yu afraed ov tese?".)
But of teh tre of teh nawlej of gud an evl, you not eatz cuz wen u eatz taht tre i fur sure mek u ded. Srsly.
An Ceiling Cat sed, teh man is alown an dat iz bad; he needz frendz so i wil maek him a gud help fo him. (i iz gud at stuf liek taht. srsly. An it will keepz him outta trubbel.)
An owt ov teh grownd Ceiling Cat madez al teh aminals on teh urfs an in teh see, an al teh burdz up in sky (an sum liek ostrijes who cudnt flyz, just fur fun). (Ceiling Cat is raely good at makingz mud pies. srsly.) An brot them untew teh man to c what he wud cal tehm: an wut teh man caled evry living aminal, dat wuz its naim. (if they didnt like it, tuff tamales, they wuz stuck wif it.)
An Ceiling Cat caused a deep sleep to fal upawn teh man, an he sleeped; an he tuk one of his ribs, cuz it has a flavr.
An Ceiling Cat can haz teh rib frum man maded into wimman, but did not eated it cuz he brot her to teh man. He sai O hai, I maded u a man but wifout long hare. Hav fun, kthxbai.
Teh man saiz,
So man muv out da baesment an lives wif da womenz, an be all u can puts your toofbrush nexta mine an I no eats you.
and teh man and teh woman weared invisible close!
Nao teh snakez wuz mor shneakay than any beest ov teh field which Ceiling Cat had made. An he meowed unto teh woman, liek I herd that Ceiling Cat said, u shall not eated frum any tree ov teh garden? Even dem trees on dat plate?
but ov teh fruit ov teh tree which iz in teh midel ov teh garden, Ceiling Cat sez, dun eatz it cuz if u eatz it he mek u ded.
4 Ceiling Cat noes dat, teh dai u eat dat froot, den u gon b able to c, An u be liek Ceiling Cat, knowin gud An evil. An dis froot, it has a flavr, srsly.
An teh eyez ov them both were opend, An they knew dat theyz were showin teh nakedz An stuff cuz Ceiling Cat didnt gaev dem no furz liek teh aminals; An they sewd sum fig-leavez togethr, An made themselvez clofs. Eve even maed firs thong but was vry vry itchy. srsly.
An Ceiling Cat calld unto teh man, An meowed unto him, "wuzzat? wut u just NOM NOM NOMd? It srsly gud?"
An he said, i heard yo voice in teh garden, An i wuz scareded, because i wuz NOMin An stuff; An i hided and did not want 4 u to see meh NOMin kthx.
An he said, hoo told u dat u was ta NOM teh holy fud? I waz injoyin watchin you be not NOMin. Did youz eated ov teh tree, dat I told u dat iz not ok u eatz ov?
An teh man said, teh woman u gave me saw teh tree An told 'bout it to me. At first I was liek "Noes!" but then, I was layk NOM NOM NOM. srsly.
An Ceiling Cat said unto teh woman, wat did u dun? An teh woman said, teh snakez playdid dirty trick on me, An i eated it.
An Ceiling Cat sed unto teh snakez, "cuz u did dis, 
An im gonna put liek badnis An stuff
Unto teh woman he said,
An unto adam he said, because u hast listend to her An hast eated teh tree wut i tellz u U NO NOMZ!
thorns also An thistlez gun it brin forth 2 u;
in teh sweatz ov ur face
An teh man calld his womenz name eve; cuz she was teh mothr of all livn' and cuz if he nameded her bertha he woulda benn lold at all da tyme
So he pwnzordz teh man; An he placeded at teh east ov teh garden ov eden teh cherubim An stuff, An teh flaming (lol) sword which turned everywherez (an if yu evar caem up 2 teh sword den it wuld flaem u on teh intarwebs an u wuldnt git no cookies or cheezburgerz eithr, srsly).
An abel, he also brought teh first meets ov his mooses (An ov teh fat of em cuz teh mooses are on Atkins.) An he made teh 1st cheezburger An gaev it to teh Ceiling Cat.
If u do gud, isn't it gunna go up? An if u doest not well, sin croucheth at teh door: it wants to has you, but you hafta maik it go away.
An cain told abel his bruda wut happnd. An one day when they were out in da field, cain got all up in abels face, An totally pwnd him.
An Ceiling Cat said "cain, where iz mah abel???"
When yous plowen teh urf, it gonna b hard n stuffz; fugitiev n wanderr youz bees in da urf. An its gonna sux cuz therz no united farmwrkr yoonyun yet.
Behold, u kick me from teh urf an killz me an i haz no iteh bitteh kitteh committeh, an' i'm dumd wit  evry1, even n00bs will pwnz meh.
An cain rode away on hiz invisible bicycle away frum Ceiling Cat, An dwelt in da land ov nod, to da rite ov eden.
An xunto enoch wuz born irad: An irad is has teh kid mehujael: An mehujael is has teh kid methushael; An methushael is has teh kid lamech.
An zillah, she also has teh kid tubal-cain, An he An his kidz maded all teh knifes An swordz An razrbladez An other sharp metal stuf: An teh sistr ov tubal-cain wuz naamah.
An lamech said unto his wivez,
If cain shall b avengd 7x,
An 2 seth, 2 him also thar wuz born son; An he calld his name enosh. den began men 2 say hai to Celing Cat moar often n stuff.
Boi An gurl creatd himz, an givd cheezburgrz, An calld their naim adam (teh peeps who rited this bibel wantz to b raely shur u knowz ther naim, srsly!), in da dai when dey gots creatd.
An all teh dais dat adam livd waz 900 An 30 yeers: An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov seth waz 900 An 12 yeers: An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov enosh waz 900 An 5 yeers: An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov kenan waz 900 An 10 yeers: An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov mahalalel waz 800 ninety An 5 yeers: An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov jard waz 900 An 60 An 2 yeers: An him got ded.
An enoch hung out wif Ceiling Cat alot An him didnt gets ded liek evry1 els. him flyed up in invisibul airplayn 2 b wif Ceiling Cat 4evr.
An all teh dais ov methuselah waz 900 An 60 An 9 yeers (srsly!): An him got ded.
An all teh dais ov lamech waz 700 An 70 An 7 yeers: An him got ded.
An noah wuz 500 yeers old: An noah maded shem An ham (who wuz not lunch meet lol) An japheth.
An when men begun 2 begats kidz on teh urf, dey had dawters. wich is gud cuz Ceiling Cat still wudnt let dem masturbate.
An teh sons ov Ceiling Cat saw taht teh dawters ov mens wer rly hot An sexy; An dey sed "PENIS GOES WHERE?" An dey had sexxs but no buttsecks cuz it wuznt inventd yet.
An Ceiling Cat sed, i no fites wif ppl 4evr so i no lets tehm liv 4evr: aftr wiel dey wil getz ded. htey is stil thinkx dey can livs long tiem but i givs dem only 1 liefs insted ov 9 liek teh kittehs. so tehre.
An sum wierd d00dz calld Nephilim wer in teh urfs in dose dais to scroos teh Creationists, An also aftr dat, when teh sons ov Ceiling Cat An dawters ov men did PENIS GOES WHERE?! but still no buttsecks, An they begats kidz. An teh kidz were badass powrful liek superman An wonder woman An all teh avatars in WoW, An dey wer all famous An stuf.
An Ceiling Cat saw dat teh ppl on teh urfs wuz all wikkid An mean An evil, An dat ppl thot ov wikkid mean evil stuf all teh tiem. An they rited wikkidpedia so evry1 wud knoes how 2 b all wikkid An mean An evil.
An Ceiling Cat wuz rly sry dat he had madez ppl on teh urf, An it maded him all sad An pissed off An stuff.
An Ceiling Cat sed im gonna pwnz all teh ppl An aminals what i has maded on teh urf; ppl An moo cows An creepy crawlyz An burdz ov teh skyz An burdz liek ostridges An stuf who cant flyz; cuz i so sry i maded them.
But Ceiling Cat liekd noah alot.
This is story about noah. noah wuz rightchus d00d, An liek mor rightchus then any1 els. noah hung out wif Ceiling Cat alot An lissend 2 tunez An played pokemons An stuff.. An sum tiems Ceiling Cat even letz him winz cuz he liekd him alot.
An noah begat 3 sons, shem, ham, An japheth. but i alrdy told u that.
An teh urf wuz corruptd An messed up, An teh urfs wuz filld wif meanies.
An Ceiling Cat saw teh urf, An saw taht it wuz corruptd cuz all teh ppl had fuxxxxd it up.
An Ceiling Cat sed 2 noah, i iz gonna pwnz the whole urf cuz teh urf has mor evilz An vilents then WoW An grand theft auto. so im gonna pwnz tehm An teh whole urfs. all teh filez in ppls hedz iz all corruptd An dey keep emailin em 2 all ther frendz. i should haev kept it in Beta longr&nbsp;:( An inventd mcafee An nortonz An stuff to keep out trojan snake wormz An viruses An rootkitz An stuf liek that.
Make gynormus bote calld ark ov gophr wud; maek roomz in teh ark, An cover it wif tar on teh insidez An outsiedz. An noah sed wait a minit u cant getz wood frm gophrs, u has 2 use treez. An Ceiling Cat sed i can callz a tree a gophr if i wantz cuz i iz Ceiling Cat. so stfu An go getz ur hammerz An sawz An stuff. An noah sed k, brb.
An Ceiling Cat sed dis iz how u makez teh ark: teh length ov teh ark 300 cubits An teh width ov it 50 cubitz An teh hite ov it 30 cubits. An noah sed wtf iz a cubit An Ceiling Cat sed stfu again. so noah did.
maek sum windoze (but not teh µ!¢®0$0ƒ+ kind) in teh ark 2 cubitz hai An mek teh door in teh side. An maek it wif 1th, 2th, An 3th storiez.
An see, i makez teh flood ov waters upon teh hole urf, 2 pwnz all teh ppl An aminals An stuffz An evrythin in teh hol urfs iz gets ded.
But i iz taeks care ov u An keeps u safe cuz i lieks u alot. An u can haz ride in teh ark, u An ur sons An ur wief An ur sons wifez 2.
An u taeks 2 ov every kind ov aminal into teh ark, 2 keep them aliv wif u; An mek shur dey r male An femael so dey can meks mor aminals after dey leavs teh ark but i wont letz dem do PENIS GOES WHERE?! on teh ark cuz mor aminals wud mek it 2 crouded.
Taek all kinds of teh birdz, An ov teh moocows, An ov teh creepy crawlyz on teh urf, 2 ov evry kind. but dont worry about teh fishz, dey can swimz gud.
An taek teh f00dz dat all teh ppl An aminals lieks 2 eatz, An gathr it up; An it shall b 4 fud 4 u, An 4 them. An noah sed thers gonna b lotz ov poopi to shuvl wif all dem aminals An stuff, An Ceiling Cat sed stfu i iz givez dem all rael bad constipashun so dont worry about it. An noah sed k and stfu'd.
so noah did evry thin Ceiling Cat tellz him, bein a gud boi bcuz he had to stfu.
For 4ty daiz and 4ty nites, it gon b wet and I gun pwn some n00bs.."
An' Noah did what Ceiling Cat told im to, and installed dry wall between teh moo cows and his sons and his dawters so dey would not do nething liek to maek cowz go "PENIS GOES WHERE?!?" during teh 4ty daiz.
An' after teh seven daiz teh wetness came.
An' teh wetnessez came to teh urf an' it was all wet.
teh animals goin in wuz male an' femail ov evry livin ting, as Ceiling Cat had toldd Noah. xcept 4 teh unicornz. And teh drag0nz and stuffs. Ceiling Cat sed 'DO NOT WANT'. and dey stayd out ov teh ark. den Ceiling Cat shut him in, and wuz liek 'k, ttyl'.
evry livin thin on teh face ov teh urfz wuz wipd out; d00dz an' animalz an' teh creeturz dat moov along teh ground an' teh burdz ov teh air wuz wipd frum teh urfz. only Noah wuz left, an' dose wif him in da ark.
teh watrz floodd teh urfz 4 hundrd an' fifty dais.
4ty dayz latrz Noah guy openz teh window he hadz maed inna teh beeg bote
Noah wuz liek wateing sevvin daiz und sent mudkipz to see teh sandbocks, but teh mudkipz noes com bak.
by teh 20An7 day of teh munf after teh munfmonth the beeg sanbox is ready to youse! srsly.
mbring out all teh aminalz and all teh crawlies and all teh burds, even the ones taht no fly —and let tehm HARBL GOES WHERE&nbsp;! and take over teh wurld"
So Noah cam out to his sunz and wifez and all tehy wifez.
All teh aminalz and all the crawliez and all the burds, evin teh onz that no fly—evin teh moocowz—came out of teh ark, leik in order, an stuuf.
"So liek teh urfz iz forevr n evr,
Teh Ceiling Cat blezt Noah and hes sunz, and sed to theys: “Haf lawt sexytime n b frootful n fill up teh urthz"
Teh aneemals wil be rly scured of u. I mak dem be pwned by u guyz, lol.
If it mvs, it kin be et. Even if it dun't—o hai plants.
Jst teh meet, doods. No bloods, kthx
Ifs u eets teh bloodz iz no gud; teh aminulz noes can has teh bloodz an teh mans noes can eets teh bloodz. An ifs u pwns teh mans iz no gud--teh Ceiling Cat pwns u.
“Ifs you pwns da man,
Yah rly, can has teh hawt secks and teh baybeez;
Ceiling Cat sez to Noah an his kidz:
“Hay looks, u an me r liek teh bests frenz an I lieks ur baybeez too,
An' teh aminulz u has: teh burdies, teh caws taht mooes, and teh otehr aminulz, dem gives teh mooves off teh boats, k?
U and me r liek teh frenz: I no moar makez teh waterz comez; u noe gets wet no moar, k?”
Teh Ceiling Cat sez: “U noes taht u and me are teh frenz and me and teh animulz r teh frenz forevr n evr becuz dis: cuz Ceiling Cat pwns rpeat...
Visible Raynbo iz in teh skyz, k? U an me an evrywunz is teh frenz becuz teh raynbo r gr8.
Ifs u sees teh clowdz, u no kin sez, "Oh Noes! Teh waters comes!" becuz tehres teh raynbo;
and I kin sez "OHai luk teh raynbo," becuz u and me and teh aminulz are hella gud frenz; I no makes teh waterz come.
Teh raynbo will be in teh clowds and I rmberz taht u and me and teh aminuls iz stil sum moar teh frenz.”
And Ceiling Cat sez to Noah, “Teh raynbo meens u and me are teh frenz, k?”
So diz d00d Noah has teh 3 sonz on teh boatz. They has sum crazi namez all Shem and Ham and Japheth or summin. Ham wuz Canaan's daddi n nawt teh lunch meats. lol
newaiz frum deez 3 bros, all of teh worldz was ppl-ated.
So liek Noah groes teh grapez.
And Noah iz liek "Oh hai grapez" and he drinkz teh grapez and drinkz teh moar grapez and no moar haz teh cloethz on.
And Ham, Canaan's daddi and nawt teh lunch meats, sees Noah and sez "Oh hai broes, he haz teh invisible cloethz."
But Shem and Japheth tooks sum cloethz n put dem on Noah cuz he wuz drunkz. They clozd ther eyez so they not sawn his peen n othr nekidness.
So Noah wakez up wif teh hangzover n he noes dat Ham shudda cut him offa teh grapez
So liek Noah sez:
And he sez:
Teh Ceiling Cat lieks Japheth,
So liek Noah keep livn three hunderd n fifty years after teh waterz goez away
So Noah becumz ded whenz he be OMG WTF 950???, wowzors but hez ded nao
Hai, now thz be th recordz o th genrashnz o Shem Ham an Jafef sonz o Noah, and sonz born 2 thm fter th flud, sonz wit duuuuum namz.
Sonz o Jafef wuz Pyle an Magog-ogog an Madai an Javan an 2-bal an Meshech an Tiraz.
They each haz a bukkit; bukkits be sorted cuz of how they talk n stuf.
Sonz o Cush wuz Seba an Havilah (Nagilah) an Sabby-tah and Raamah an Sabteca; an sonz o Raamah wuz Sheba and D-dan.
an he bilt Resen in da middle.
an others; he wuz busy!
an sum more, I forget.
That wuz Ham.
Arpachshad gotz a betur name.
an some more, yeah, he got himz sum kidz.
kthxbai.
And all uv de Urf was lolcatspeekinkz usin' lolcats werdz.
Whial teh menz be movin' eest, they finded vallee in teh land uv Shinar an sitted ther.
Dey sed "hai, letz maek teh brix an make 'em harrd wif fiir." So dey uzed brix for ston an bitumen (wtf izzat?) for mortar.
Den dey sed "hai, letz maek reel tall towerz for us so we be togethr forevr!"<br />
So, Ceiling Cat comeded down an saw teh men an ther towerz.
Den Ceiling Cat sez "Oh noes, if they all togethr after mah hi spot, they gonna get mah hi spot!
I gots'ta confuzzle 'em and stop 'em!"
Dat's wai Ceiling Cat pwned 'em an dragd 'em away from ther towerz. Dey stop buldin' after dat.
So teh towerz wuz calld Babel cuz Ceiling Cat made teh men babbul ther befor movin' dem.<br />
So liek lissen, dis here'z teh stuffs Shem did.  Two yeerz after teh Urfs wuz all fludz n' stuff, Shem was liek a hunnerd yrz old, and he finilly got doen to bizness makin teh babeez. He namez furst babee Arpachshad.
Shem went an lived OMG ANOTHER 500 YRZ and madez more babeez.<br />
Arpachshad only waeted 35 yrz before he made babeez, and was teh dad ov Shelah.
Tehn Arphaxad lived OMG ANOTHER 403 YRZ and madez more babeez.<br />
Shelah only waeted 30 yrz before he goed PENIS GOES WHARE?!, and was teh dad ov Eber.
Tehn Shelah lived 403 more yrz also and madez more babeez 'cuz he dint want hiz dad to show him up.<br />
Eber waeted 34 yrz to has babeez, and was teh dad o teh Peleg.
Tehn Eber lived 430 more yrz and madez more babeez jus to show hiz dad and grampz whoz teh boss.<br />
Peleg took afta grampa Shelah an maed babeez at 30 yrz old, and was teh dad ov Reu
But Peleg only lasted 209 more yrz, tho he maeded more babeez.<br />
Reu went an did it at 32, and was teh dad ov Serug.
Reu liveded only 207 yrz longer, tho he too maeded more babeez.<br />
At 30, Serug maed babeez, and was teh dad ov Nahor.
Serug only lasted 200 mor yrz, but still maeded mor babeez.<br />
Nahor beet his daddies past and maed babeez at 29, and was teh dad ov Terah.
Nahor also only liveded to 119, but he too maeded other babeez.<br />
Terah maeded teh babeez Abram, Nahor, and Haran by teh tiem he was 70.<br />
An Sarai was liek "OMG I cant hav babeez!&nbsp;;("<br />
So den Terah tookded Abram, Lot, and Sarai and ran off out ov Ur ov Chaldeans. He ment to hed to Canaan, but dey stopded in Haran.
Terah died dere in Haran afta 205 yrz.
Ceiling Cat sais I can mek u famous on teh interwebs and u mek teh babiez and stuffs.
I leik dem who leik u, an I DO NOT WANT! dem who DO NOT WANT! you, and I liekd the south africa and the Iraq cuz you leik.
Abrams explorded all his base.
Da King makeded Abrams gowai and was in his base, stealin all his stuffz.
Abram had gots menny moocowz and chikenz(notz freid) and piggs and such but pigz wuz stil k cuz abram An hiz peepz wuznt rly joos yet so kosher wuznt invntd yet. he gots too lots of teh shynee coinz and stuffz
An den Abram wuz liek "CIELING CAT!!!!!!!!!!11111oneeleven"
An Abram and L0t wuz liek "MORTAL KOMBAT!!" An Canaanites and Perizzites wuz ther 2
An teh hole urf is larj liek really big hairball. we can splitz up
An kittehs of Sodom are evul like puppehs and talkin bad bout Ceiling Cat An iz keepz on raedin wikkidpedia An ritin mor stuff in it bout how 2 b mor eviler den puppehs.
so you goes and walks thru my sandboxz, cuz i givez it all to u"
So Abram moved his homez and goed to live by teh really big treez and plants and grass of Mamre at Hebron, where he makez a great cheezburger shrine for teh Cieling Cat.
For 12th years tey suffer to Kedolomer, but 13th year they Mortal Kombat!!!@#
tehy turn back an went to En Mishpat, and they has whole base now of Amalekites and Amorites in Hazazon Tamar.
Tehy grabd Lot and his catnipz and cheezburgers, because he in Sodom homez.
when abram got back he shared cheezburgers with Sodom king
An He told Abram you can has blessing, saying "blessed can be Abram by Ceiling Cat, Creator of cheezburgers and cookies and stuff"
And blessed be Ceiling Cat soo high up,
Teh king of Sodom sayz 2 Abram, "i can has teh kittehs, you keep teh catnip and cheezburgers and stuff"
I no take anyting but teh cheezburgers my kittehs alredy eated.
An den, Abram can has dream of Cieling Cat, and he sez
with no kittehs, my servants can has mah homez and stufs
He takes Abram outside and is liek "look at teh starz and hevenz, if yous can count them, so is ur kittehs"
And Abram was liek srsly?  All cause Ceiling Cat is Righchus
He also says "I iz Ceiling Cat, I give you lots and lots of urfs to has"
Abram was leik "But how Ceiling Cat, teh horde alredy has possesions?"
An Ceiling Cat was leik "Bring me moocow, goat and rams but only 3 yeerz old with a white burd and baby pidgun"
Tehn evil burdz came from the ceiling and eated dem.  Abram no liek and says you no can has.
but ur great-great-grand kittehs will come back here, cuz then sinz of Amorites reach critical mass"
Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites and Jebusites."
Sarai sez to Abe, "Teh Ceiling Cat sez I no can haz kittehs. Maybe Hagar can haz kittehs. Make kittehs with Hagar."
Sarai gotted madz at Abram. She sed, "yr fawlt I is not happy. You and my bukkit holdr made kittehs and kittehs made her sasseh. The Invisible Man sez hooz rite.
Abe sed, "Shez YR bukkit holdr. No srsly." So Sarai took Hagarz cheezeburgerz from her and Hagar ran.
He sed, "Where from, where to" "I is hiding frm Sarai."
"I'll make you get lots and lots of kittehs."
Ceiling Cat spokes-kitteh sais to her:
Kitteh will B crazy kitteh donkeh;
Tis why teh water hole iz named Beer Lahi Roi, still der, always will be.
Abram was really old when Hagar haz kittens.
We can has speshul covenint n i do invisible magic so yous breed leik rabbit."
i put u in Canaan, first we subdew natives so you can has it 4eva.  OHai did I mention i be Ceiling Cat and pwn all yous?"
Any kitteh with teh dangly bit who not can has cut, i make him go far away, 4 he break teh covenint"
I make invisible Ceiling Cat magic on her an she give u tiny kitteh with dangly bits.  Nayshuns and kingz will come out of her kittehs, cuz i lay my badass blessins on her."
An Abraham say to Ceiling Cat, "I has son already, Ishmael.  He can has awesome Ceiling Cat blessin 2?"
Ceiling Cat say, "Kthxbai!"
n all teh others on his base 2.  Everone with teh dangly bits go snippy snippy.
But wen Abraham waz 2 liek "Oh hai" ther waz 3 doodz and he waz leik "WTF" n he pwned hisself
And you can haz cheezburgr." And 3 doodz sed "we can has!"
so Abraham went to Sarah and waz liek "Mek som cookehs!"
And he sed to 3 doodz "here, you can has"
N tehy wer liek "Wher ur woman?" And Abraham sed "ovar ther"
And Sarah LOLed and waz liek "WTF!? NO WAI!  WE R TEH OLD!!11 LOL"
Nothin iz inposbell 4 Ceiling Cat, srsly, she gon be teh preggers!"
And Sarah waz liek "I no LOLed" Ann he waz liek "yea u did"
Cuz I choes him so he n his kittehs coud say liek 'Cieling Cat iz cool, srsly'"
"Im gonna chekc it out n see"
"WEAK"
So Ceiling Cat waz liek "k if iz 50 ppl i wont pwn it"
wat if has 45 good ppl?" N Ceiling Cat sed "ill not pwn if has 45"
N Abraham was liek "wat bout 40???" an Ceiling Cat sed "i wont if has 40"
And Abraham sed "k, dont b mad or shred me, but wat if has 30?" and Ceiling Cat sed "i wont if has 30"
And Abraham sed "OMG, but wat if has 20?" and Ceiling Cat sed "i wont if has 20"
And Abraham sed "k, dont b mad, thsi is last tiem I promiz, but wat if has 10?" and Ceiling Cat sed "i wont if has 10. srsly"
And thei wer both liek "Kthxbai"
Doodz, he saiz, plz crash on my couch, you can wash my kittehs feet and I will keck j00 out when I r woke. Lolz, teh doodz said, we iz gonna sleep together in teh middle of teh citeh.
Teh drunc guyz says to Lot, dood, letz bang teh guyz in j00r place. VISIBLE BUTTSEX!
Aw Hellz nah. We iz gonna hit j00r door an hav lemmon party. ur gonna get raped fisrt.
Teh doodz MADE TEH MAGIK ANTI LITE! (is ok tho cuz kitteh can see in teh dark)
j00 cant hang out with uz be cuz we is goin' to PWN this place."
Lot sez to hiz daughters fiances (teh 1 s he wuz gonna let the hole town do PENIS GOES WHERE wif).  "U better go cause Ceiling cat gonna pwn this" place but they thaught it wuz a TARP.
Teh Doodz sez GTFO with ur wimenz or we pwn U 2.
One ov teh doodz sez GTFO nd don't l00k back or RTFM.  Go 2 the ceiling or we gonna pwn U.
howse abouts the lettle town ovar thar?  Pweese?  cauze lettle town is lettle." (lettle toen be called Zoar wich iz funny bibbel naim 4 lettle)
But I gives U teh fast cuz I be waitin fo yo call"
But Lotz wife not RTFM and now has a flavor, flavor iz salty.
He RTFM and see lots of smokes n stuff
Ceiling cat memberd Abraham and didn't pwn A Lot.
I get daddy drunk and do PENIS GOES WHERE?!  So we can save our recessive genes."
That night they giv daddy winez and /b. Daddy drink winez to make imagez go away and older daughter do PENIS GOES WHERE?!.  /b so bad daddy knot remember.
/b nasty again so Lot drinkZORS to stuporz and younger daughter doez PENIS GOES WHERE?!
Lettle daughter plop out boy called Ben-(ken)Ammi who be father of (ken)Amminoites today n sing gud.
An Abraham saiz "Dewd, my wief Sarah be iz my sistr," an Abimelech iz liek "Lol, thaz messd up" an takd Sarah
But Ceiling Cat comez to Abimelech while hez sleepn an saiz, "O hai, thaz not rite you liek takd a wief away, you be ded now"
An Abimelech is all, "Abraham saiz he an his sistr be all liek "PENIS GOES WHERE?" an thaz not rite"
But givez back Abraham his sistr even tho thaz nasty 'cuz he bez knowin' teh futur n' stufs an if you doeznt I eated you, kthxbai"
An he sai, "Wut made u do dat?"
And then latrz, after Ceiling Cat telled us to leef Ejip, so Abraham did sez "look, no tell other pplz we is marry. i no like teh commit no moar. instead you say you is mai sister, k?" And Sarah was all "k, wut can i do?"
an Abimelech was all, you can has mai base."
He sez "Yo, I have giv ur burdder 1x10<sup>3</sup> silver cookehs (about 25lbs). we cool now? plz do not eated me, sowry."
cause when all this started, he put in INVISIBLE DIAPHRAM.
Abraham wuz hunderd yeers old at da time.
Whoda thunk it?? Im all old, but Ceiling Cat restorded ma ovaries."
So she told Abraham 2 tell Hagar the slavezor and her n00b son to GTFO, cuz she didn't want them to has no cheezburgrz.
Ishmael will getz cheezburgrz l8r when he becomes all h4xx0r n stuffz. srsly."
Abraham tooked sum cookize n waterz and putted it on Hagar's shoulderz and sended her off wif the boi.  She was in ur deserts lookin for ur waterz. srsly, it was called Beersheba.
and cry cause she dont wanna see boi get ded and dry up like prune
pls get him and he can has cheezburgerz cause he is h4xx0r now."
Kitteh make waterz (no not that kind, teh kind U can drink), so U CAN HAS waterz and not dry out and l00k like prune. srsly, it happen.
Desert called Paran n mom gots him an egyptian bride (she walk like egyptian, prolly smell like 1 2).
swear U not be like NO CAN HAS to me or anything wif my DNA, U be like CAN HAS cheezburgerz n cookiez n happy leik I dids to U."
Abraham sez "K BFF kthnx"
Abimelech sez "WHUT? WHENZ? HUH? WTF?"
Abimelech sez WTF? sheepz, I no wanna HARBL GOES WHERE.
Abraham sez "sheepz mean I made hole 4 waterz ur doodz pwnd."
So nows that place called Beersheba cause those doodz sweared oath there (Beersheba iz funny bibbel naim 4 well ov 7 or well ov oath, we not rly shur).
n he stayed in teh Philistines for a loooooooooong time.
An he gaev wud to Isaac to curry an he tuk torch an knife.
An Isaac sed "K dad wher sheep?"
He gon stab Isaac Oh noez!
An Abraham sed dis place now cald "Ceiling Cat Gievs Cheezburgrz."
An Abraham went wit Isaac an servnts to Beer-sheba 4 long vaycayshun.
An Nahors PENIS GOES WHERE?! kitteh Reumah had kittehs too!  Had Tebah, Gaham, Thahash, an Maachah!  WTFLOLBBQ lots of kittehs!
at Kiriath Arba (a.k.a. Hebron) in teh land ov Canaan, n Abraham went 2 mourn 4 her and 2 do tearz at her.
"YO Gimmeh somez landz so I can burry my wife, I pays"
"U CAN HAS anything U wantz"
so he will sell me teh cave of Machpelah, which be hiz, I payz full price"
"No, sup; I gives yous the field, and I gives yous the cave that is in it. itz K, bury the meat, it smells"
and sez "I pay moniez I rly du"
(I can get 400 silver cookiez (about 10 lbs) 4 teh land butz sheese stinkin up, plant her!)"
Abraham giveh 400 silver cookies to Ephron (even tho he don't gotta)
So Abraham now can haz teh field an cave.
but DO WANT wife from my landz and relatives 4 Issac."
Servant sez whut if she DO NOT WANT come here, Do I takes him there?"
Servent dood putz hand unner his legz (ewwwww) n made oath
He getz there when the gurlz are commin it fill BUCKETZ, he makes camuels neel near waterz hole
if she sez me and camuels CAN HAS BUCKETS, I bring her back."
she never do PENIS GOES WHERE? and waz pretty, She fill BUCKET with waterz
He sez CAN HAS BUCKET?
she sez U CAN HAS MY BUCKET
He watched to see if Ceiling Cat liked this 1.
and sez, letz go 2 ur dads palce.
YOU CAN HAS room at my place
KTHZ dood, I'm goin to Abraham's DNA
Laban sez "d00d!!!1!1! WTF you here 4? You BFF Ceiling Cat, check out my crib."
the was delicios cakes but he not eated it, he sez "I do not want eated it until I tell u this"
but do wanted wife 4 isaac from hims relativez, daz ok."
I axed "whut if she DO NOT WANT come here?"
If it don't wurk, just GTFO. KTHXBAI.
n she says U CAN HAS MY BUCKET and ur camuels CAN HAS MY BUCKET too" I'll call it gud.
I wasnt done talkin to Ceiling Cat when I sees Rebeka an sez "CAN I HAS UR BUCKET?"
n she sez U CAN HAS MAI BUCKET and ur camuels too.
I axed her who she wuz 
you CAN HAS gurl, so ur master's son can do PENIS GOES WHERE on her.  Leik Ceiling Cat sez"
then they eated delicious cake and drinked and sleeped.
Bro n mom sed, "Woah d00d, we needs 10 dayz, then U can GTFO."
he sez "WTF? Ceiling Cat may get pissed"
They axe n she sez KBAI
n they blessed Rebeka n sed:
So Rebeka n her maidz got on the camuels n GTFO
n sez "who dat who be a commin 2 meat us?"
n he bringed he into his mom's tent n married her, and did PENIS GOES WHERE? and was comforted after his mother's death.
Midian maek Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and Eldaah.  Keturah maek all ov dem.
But when he was leik not ded yet, he sended some cookiez n cheezburgerz east the bois who he maek wif PENIS GOES WHERE wif udder gurlz.
After Abraham get deded, Ceiling cat gived Isaac Ceheezburgerz n stuff when he was at Beer Lahai Roi.
We be talkin bout Abraham's boi Ishmael taht Hagar who walk leik Egiptian ploop out when she wus workin 4 Sarah.
All the peepulz he maded lived from Havilah 2 Shur, nearz Egypt and tehy DID NOT leik each udder.
till he wus 40 yearz old, srsly.
Ceiling Cat sez 
neXt 1 come out holdin onto 1st one foots (he musta comes out backwards) so theys names him Jacob (which is funny bibel nam 4 grabbs heelz or deceiver).  Isaac wus 60 when dey ploop out.
Dad leiked Esau cause he eated lots of mouses, but mom leiked Jacob.
n sed "Gimmeh sum delicious red cookiez, cauze I no can find mouses and I so humgry I could die."
Jacob sez "YOU CAN NOT HAS COOKIEZ, but givh me ur inheritance and YOU CAN HAS DELICIOUS COOKIEZ n CAKES."
Esau sez, "I humgry bad, K"
Buy Jacob sez "swear first delicious cookiz later",  Esau sez "KTHX".
So Esau swear n CAN HAS DELICIOUS COOKIZ, n go NOM NOM NOM
So Isaac stayed in Gerar.
Sum d00dz livin there axed him bout hiz wife Rebeka, n he sed "She mai sister" cause she so buteamus n l00k leik Natalie Portman covered in hot grits he wuz afraid they eated him and make him teh ded.

n Abimelech sez "d00d!1! whut if 1 of my guys did PENIS GOES WHERE on hers, thats leik INVISIBLE ERROR"
an he continud "Any my n00bs touch her gets teh ded"
so teh Philistines were leik "I'n in ur waterz pluggin up ur holez.
So Abimelech sez 2 Isaac, "GTFO ur gots teh powerz"
he was leik I'm in mai holez unpluggin mai waterz taht teh Philistines plugged up n got waterz.
yet nother hole, but no 1 sez "no can has" so he call it Rehoboth (leik beach but hole) n sed "Ceiling cat sez I CAN HAS waters n landz n we happy"
Ceiling Cat sez <i>Yo 'member me? I wus wif ur dad Abraham, don't be scairded, I gives U cheezburgerz n cakes n stuff, n U gets moar kitteh"</i>
Isaac builded a cat tree and callded Ceiling Cat n maded a hole for waterz near where he putted hiz tent
Isaac sez "WTF U here 4? U tells me to GTFO?"
I no eated you and you no eated us K? cause U HAS CHEEZBURGERZ"
tehn dey sweard oath and Isaac sed "GTFO".
so he callz it Shibah, n teh town be Beersheba.
An Issac an Rebekah sez, "DO NO WANT!"
Isaac gotted olded n blinded he sez <b>YO Esau</b>,  Easu sez "sup?"
soes I CAN HAS sum delicious cakez so U CAN HAS cheezburgerz in B 4 ded"
n give 2 daddi n say U CAN HAS DELICIOUS CAKEZ so he giveh U cheezburgerz n be in before ban (ded).
Dad may feels my no furz, then he would cockmongle me."
Mom sez "I'll take teh cockmongle 4 U, trust me KTHNXBAI"
den she gived him delicious cakez n cookiez she maided.
Jacob wented to daddie n sez <b>Yo</b>
Jacob sed "I R Esau, 1st ploop U CAN HAS MY DELICIOUS CAKEZ n COOKIEZ, CAN I HAS CHEEZBURGER?"
Isaac sez "Damn, that wuz fast, where use find it?", Jacob sez "I gots it from Ceiling Cat"
Isaac sed "comeh, lemmie touch U so i know if U R furfag Esau"
"R U rly Esau?" he sed
"Gimmeh somez delicious cakez n cookiez n i gives U cheezburgerz"
Jacob does visible kiss with Isaac, when Isaac smellz Jacob he sez:
"Ceiling cat gonna maek U wet
landz will serve U
n sed here be some delicious cake maid from mouse, U CAN HAS MY MOUSES"
Isaac sez; "WTF? WRU? we did this B4", Esau sez "I B ME"
Isaac sed "WTF? I yust gave cheezburgerz to the last bastard who wuz here, ur AFU"
Esau sed "WTF!!1!!1!!! gimmeh cheezburgerz too OMFG, BOHICA"
Isaac sez "sry d00d, ur SOL"
Esau sed "yo, U named him Jacob (Bibul speak 4 he decieves) He bited me 2 timez, he tooked mai Inhertance n now he eated my cheezburger, you do no has cheezburger 4 me?"
Isaac sez, "sorry, ur SOL"
Esau goes "WTF? CAN I HAS CHEEZBURGER?" n doos tearz.
Isaac sez;
ur gonna be ready 4 brawl
Esau wuz pissed, he sez "Imma go columbine on Jacob ASAP"
I'll tells U when itz cool
Rebecka sed "I already gotz me 2 hittite slut DIL's DO NOT WANT! If Jacob do PENIS GOES WHERE? wif a hittite, I be an hero"
Isaac sez "GTFO KTHXBAI"
so he married 1 for the lulz (he just puted her in hiz harem wit da Hittites)
I R Ceiling Cat, Watchin U wander n I maek sure U dont get losted."
This place be stairway to heaven, where Zeppelin be at?"
he callded that place Bethel (but it wuz already calleded Luz IN B4 the Bethel; EPIC FAIL!!).
n I'll maek a cat box on this rock n U can has 0.1 cash back.
teh peepuls do move rock so sheepz CAN HAS waterz n tehn puts rock back.
Jacob sez "whar U B from?"
He sez "U no Laban, Nahor's grandson"
He sez "He K?"
He sez "sheeps CAN HAS waterz"
tehy sez "sheepz NO CAN HAS waters, need moar sheepz"
He tolded her he wuz her cousin, so she run n tell daddy.
tehn Laban say "UR my 1st cousin!"
Laban sez "I wants to pays U2 workz, how much U want?"
Leah eyez point different directionz but Rachel pretty n she stacked
Jacob sez "I wurk 7 yearz then I CAN HAS Rachel?, cause I got teh loves 4 her"
So Jacob hung out 7 yearz 4 Rachel.
Jacob sez "K, GIMMEH Rachel I wanna do PENIS GOES WHERE on hers"
n Laban gave servant gurl Zilpah to her as maidservent
When it gets light in teh morning, Leah!1!!1!! Jacob sez to Laban "WTF? where B Rachel"
then after U do PENIS GOES WHERE with her for a week, tehn U CAN HAS udder 1, gonna cost nuther 7 yearz tho.
Jacob does PENIS GOES WHERE to Rachel n he even loved this 1, n he worked nother 7 years.
Leah getted preggerz n ploop out boy Ruben n sed "Ceiling cat see me sad, now Jacob luv me 2" (boy later go on to maek samwichz, rly, srsly)
She ploop out another calld Simeon n sez "Ceiling cat be in my ceiling, helpin me get luv"
She ploop out nother 1 called Levi n sed "now heeze gonna rly luv me, I ploop out 3"
She ploop out yet another called Judah n sed "TNX Ceiling cat no moar plz hurtz, KTHNX"
Rachel has INVISIBLE DIAPHRAM n sez Jacob "Gimmeh babies or I go ded".
Jacob sez "I no can see INVISIBLE DIAPHRAM, WTF?"
She sez "do PENIS GOES WHERE on Bilhah, my GF K?"
Rachel sez "TNX Ceiling cat" n name kid Dan
Rachel sez "I WIN", n call hims Naphtali, but Jacob just be smilin
Leah name him Gad.
Leah CAN HAS happy n call kid Asher.
When Reuben wuz harvestin wheat he find cookiez, He gived teh delicious cookiez to hiz mom Leah, Rachel sez "CAN I HAS delicious cookiez?"
Leah sez "YOU CAN NO HAS my cookiez as I can no do PENIS GOES WHERE? with Jacob"
Jacob cums home, n Leah sez "I DO WANT PENIS GOES WHERE?, I paid 4U with delicious cookiez".  Jacob did PENIS GOES WHERE?
Leah sez "Ceiling cat iz happy when I gives Jacob my GF Zilpah" so when she ploop out boy, she names him Issachar.
Leah sez "Ceiling cat gived me nother kid, Jacob gonna leik me now, I names kid Zebulun"
Later she ploop out gurl called Dinah
She calls him Joseph n sez "I can has another?"
I CAN HAS wifes n kids so I can GTFO.
I pay you not 2 GTFO".
I maded you moar animulez n Ceiling cat gived U cheezburgerz, now it's my turn.
"Whut U want?" he ask.
Then he go 3 dayz away n still watch Laban's sheepz"
Jacob got teh rich n CAN HAS large flockz n servents n sheeps n donkies n camulels.
An Jacob lookeded at Laban an saw he wuz sum pissed.
Yer dad leik totally iz hatin on me, srsly! Ceiling Cat lurves me, but yer dad is awl Rawr Rawr Rawr.
but now he is teh suk! Hrdcor! Totally ripped me off! Tuk my bling!
So den Ceiling Cat tookeded AWL his moos and gives em 2 me.
But teh bestestet part is taht wen the moos did PENIS GOES WHERE?!, all dem moos wuz spottsy and stripey. I mean, I dreameded taht part, but it's joost leik it's troo."
"an den dis 1 time, I wuz dreamin taht teh Ceiling Cat yelled at me, sayin "D00d!" an I wuz all leik "WUT??"
so now uz gotz to make liek a tree an leave.'
So evertin Ceiling Cat tookeded is totally ours now, findrs keeprs, no gives backs."
wit awl hiz stufs goin to Gilead.
But taht nite Ceiling Cat sez to Laban, 'D00d, DO NOT WANT u 2 talk 2 Jacob. Not nothin.
AN!! u stole awl my l00t! So, liek I sez - WTF?"
an wen Laban showed up, she wuz all, "D00d, iz Taht Time of Teh Month, piss off."
An TAHT iz y Ceiling Cat dun gotz hiz nite vision goggles on u!"
Laban calld it Jegarsahadutha (pth pth, liek hevin cat hare in ur mouf), but Jacob cuden say taht wurd, so he calld it Galeed.
In teh mornin, Laban kissie hiz dotters bye bye an wen bak were he come from. Gud riddans.
When Jacob sawed thems he sez "I found Ceiling Cats litterboz!1!!", so he calleded that where he was at Mahanaim (n he no can has steamroller).
n I gots donkies n moocows n sheepz n goatz n serventz n cookiez n stuff.  I tellin U this so U leik me."
when hiz budz come back they sez "Yo, Hees a commin wit leik 400 d00ds"
He thinkz "If Essau n hiz GI Joes eated 1 group, the udder may not be eated".
Cause U sed 'I be makin U rich n lotsa kidlets'"
He gived the to hiz d00ds n sed "U go ferst, n spreadem out.
U say Jacob giveh U dis, he be in teh back"
So teh gifts went away n Jacob stayed home.
the teh Cat sed "Lemme go, it be light"
Then teh Cat sez "WRU?"
the Cat sez "U no longer Jacob but I names U Israel cause U wins in fights wif Ceiling Cat and peeplez n ovarcome.
Jacob sez "WRU?"
So Jacob calleded the palce Peniel cause he sed "I saw Ceiling Cat but he did not eated me".
That's why Israelites no can eated teh tendon stuck to teh socket o teh hip, cause Ceiling Cat eated Jacob's hip nearz the tendon.	
Take my pressie, cuz I broughtz it 2 u all dis way on a camel, n Ceiling Cat likez me n I have lotz of cheezburgerz." N when he urged him, he tooks it.
U go 1st n I'll catch up 2 u in Seir, k?"
But Jacob iz a lier lolz cuz he goez to Succoth n buildz crib 4 him n his cattlez n cattlez have stalls n dat why dey callz it Succoth cuz that means "booths" n Hebrewz jive lolz
He setz up altar dere n callz it EL-elohe-yisrael dat mean "Ceiling Cat uf Israel."
So Shechem sez 2 his daddy-cat, "Yo, I wantz 2 marrie her NAO!"
Jacob's boy-kittehs hearded whassup n cum in frum field all o.O n &gt;:O n OMG WTF!!!11!111one!!!111eleventyteen!!!! cuz dis goyim did PENIS GO WHERE wit Dinah, n dat gainst da Izralee's roolz.
Srsly, asks me 4 all mah cheezburgerz n bling n stuff, n i will gif u it cuz I wanna PENIS GO WHERE? to her she's that good n da sack. Jus let me marrie her k?
But if n u 2 chicken 2 cut off ur 4skin den we go kthxbai n leavez n take Dinah wit us cuz u b 2 lamer n 2 n00b 2 marrie her.
So all dems did whut Hamor n Shechem sez, n all go cut dere 4skins off OUTCH!
n dey taked all de bling n all the kittehs n all da mamacatz n furnitcher n stuff, EVERYTHING, GET IT???! jeez U dumb k where wuz I everytink n evvybuddy was tookened as prisonush n booty.
But the boy kittehs said "Should r sisty-kitty be treated liek a ho?"
As dey went Ceiling Cat hissed and yowled and waved his big scary claws at da peeps all round so dey didn't chase Jacob's boy-kittehs.
He buildeded a cathouse n named da place El-Bethel, cuz it wuz dere Ceiling Cat revealed Himself to him when he run skairt frum his brudder.
Deborah, Rebekah's nurse-kitteh, got pwned by bein old, n dey burreed her under an oak beeloo Bethel; so it wuz named Allon-bacuth dat means 'oak of da weeping."
Celing Cat sez 2 him,
n Ceiling Cat sez to him
Jacob gave dis site where Ceiling Cat spokened 2 him da name Bethel.
Israel leevz her dere n goez on 2 Migdal-eder.
N while Israel's dere boy-kitteh Reuben goez and does PENIS GO WHERE? with Bilhah, Izzy's girlfriend on da side, n Izzy found out.
And da sonz uf Zilpah, Leah's mad: Gad n Asher. K don' 4get dese r Jacob's sons born in Paddam-aram.
when he got pwned. He wuz burreed by his sons Esau n Jacob.
This iz bout Esau's kittehz, and gitz srsly borin if u wun skip it lol!!!1
n also Basemath kitteh of Ishmael and littermayt of Nebaioth.
and Oholibamah (lol!) whelpz Jeush, Jalam n Korah. Deez wer tomcat litter of Esau, what wuz born in Canaan.
So Esau roamded moer and goez to Seir.
K an this iz abowt Esau, liek i alredy sayed.
This wut Esau calld his sonz, but iz not gon be on test or nething:
Eliphaz wuznt neutered 2: 
Eliphaz had girl on side named Timna, she dun whelpt Amalek. Is grandsunz of Adah in case yu wernt followin.
Reuel wuznt fikksed 2: 
Oholibamah's litter wit Esau: 
An dese ar bosscatz what camed owt Essau's litter: 
Bak 2 Reuel agin: 
An mor from Oholibamah: 
Those wuz Esau's litter.
Seir teh Horite wuznt fikksed either. Srsly, WTF??!!1!: 
Lotan had kittehz: 
Shobal had kittehz 2: 
Zibeon 2. No 1 wuz getin fixded bak den: 
Anah had kittehz 2. Surprize lol: 
Dishon had kittehz. I tole yu can skip this alreddy: 
Ezer's kittehz: 
Dishan's litter: 
Deez r Horite bosscatz: 
K were doin moer bossez now. Deez wuz all bossez in Edom befoer any Israelite boss evn:
Bela wuz boss of Edom an hiz dad wuz Beor. His place wuz calld Dinhabah.
Bela got ded, so then Jobab wuz boss.
Jobab dieded 2, then Husham wuz boss.
Husham got ded 2, so Hadad, who srsly pwned Midian in teh face, got to be boss. Hiz city naym Avith.
An Hadad got ded, so den Samlah iz boss.
Then Samlah got ded, Shaul wuz next boss.
An Shaul dieded 2, so Baal-Hanan wuz next.
Baal-Hanan dieded, an Hadad wuz boss. Hiz city naym Pau, an hiz wife wuz Mehetabel.
These bossez from Esau's litter, organyzd an stuff: 
An Jacob livd in place calld Canaan wher no1 noo hiz famlyz An no1 carez if he wuz n00b.
This iz story ov Jacob. Iz rly story of joseph but teh 1th ppl who rited teh bibel rited it down rong. mus b cuz ov teh funny alfabetz. Joseph wuz 17 yrz old kidz An 1 dai he An his bros wuz givin cookies 2 teh sheeplz. An Joseph wuz brown nose An told hiz old man all teh wikkid stuffs dey did like raedin wikkidpedia An masturbatin An smokin weedz An stealin pplz stufz An stuf.
An when his bros saw taht Jacob liekd Joseph mor than ne ov dem, dey hatez him An getz all pissed off An stuf An getz all up in hiz face An sed rly r00d mean ingorent thingz 2 him.
we wuz in ur field harvestin ur weetz cuz it wuz farmrz dai off (cuz dey maded untied farmwrkrz union dammit), An all ur weetz wuz blong 2 my weetz.
An his bros sed 2 him, wtf u ben smokin? u think u b king or sumthin? u thinkz u iz bosscat of us? An they hatez him evn mor cuz ov his drems An wot he sed 2 dem.
An he cud haz nothr wierd drem An told his bros yo d00dz, I haz a nothr wierd drem, An chek dis out, teh sun An teh moon An teh eleven stars r blong 2 me.
An his bros wuz rly jelus of him; but his old man rmembrd wot he sed.
An Israel whos rael naim wuz jacob sed 2 Joseph, did ur bros gon 2 Shechem 2 getz cookies 4 teh sheepz? i wantz u 2 goez An mek shur deyz alrite. An he sed k.
An he gotz losted (fuxxing mapquest!!!!1!!) An sum d00d finded him An axt him, wut u lookin 4?
An he sed i iz lookin 4 my bros who iz gon 2 getz cookies 4 teh sheeplz.
An wen dey seez him An he wuz stil on teh roadz long wais awai lookin 4 dem, they deciedd 2 pwnz him.
so letz us pwnz him, An trhow him in2 sum pit, An we will say sum evil aminal like crocodiel or lion or lolrus eated him: An 2 hell with hiz drems lol.
so dont pwnz him, jus trhow him into sum pit way out in teh booniez, An dont hurtz him. cuz Reubn kind of liekd joseph An wuz sort of brown nose 2 An thot he mite taekz him bak 2 his old man wen no1 wuz lookin but he didnt tellz tehm taht..
An they trhowd him in2 a pit An tehr wuznt eny waterz in it. no cheezburgrz or cookies either.
An it wuz tiem 4 lunch so dey sitz down An eatz cheezburgrz An cookies: An they saw a crew ov Ishmeelites form Gilead goin 2 egypt with lotz ov camels An all kindz ov rly gud herbz An weedz An othr rly gud stufz taht wuz liek catnipz 4 ppl An wuznt illegalz yet cuz Ceiling Cat didnt mek ne lawz yet but taht wuz ok cuz he wuz gonna maek alot of lawz l8r in exodus An leviticus An numb3rs An d00teromony.
we dosent has to pwnz him if we can sellz him. An his bros sed k.
An he sez 2 his bros, josepf iz gon, wtf r we gonna do now?
An they brought teh cloths 2 ther old man An sed, we founded htese totaly badass cloths. r htey joseph cloths or not..
An he knew it, An sed, iz my sons cloths; sum evil aminal eated him liek he wuz cookie; Joseph is 4 shur torn up in litel peeces. srsly.
An all his wiefs An kidz trys 2 maekz him feelz mor betr but wuz no workin An he sed i iz gonna b all sad An emo til i diez. so he kept on bein all sad An emo An stufz.
An in egypt teh Midianites sold joseph 2 sum d00d naimd Potiphar, who wuz Pharaohs captain ov teh guard wich iz sorta liek teh cheef of poleesez.
N she hadded a secnd kitten n nameded him Onan.
Then Judah wuz liek "OK Onan, u know WHERE HARBLZ GO wif ur brother's wife.  Its ur job now to make kittenz for ur brother."
So aftr a long tiem Judah's wife died.  She wuz Shua's daughtr remembr.  Aniwai when Judah felt bettr he wented to Timna wif hiz frend Hirah teh Adullamite to shear hiz sheepz.  The sheepz wuznt Hirah's, they wuz Judah's.
"Ur seal n itz cord n ur staff," said Tamar.  So he gived them to her and HARBLZ WENT WHERE? n she gotted pregnant.
Judah was liek "OMG LOL she winz! bcz I wouldn't let her marry mai son Shelah." There wuz no more harblez betwin Judah and Tamar aftr that.
N then hiz brother, who hadded teh red thread on his paw, comed out n they nameded him Zerah.
An ne way teh ishmeelite d00dz taekz Joseph 2 Egypt; An taht egyptian d00d Potiphar who wuz pharos cheef ov poleesez buyed him An gaev tehm alot of moneyz.
An potipharz wief seez taht Joseph wuz teh cute An she sed we can haz sexxs?
An she wuz buggin Joseph evry dai 2 haz secks wif her but he wudnt do it even tho he wuz n00b An didnt kno about “PENIS GOES WHERE?” but he thot he mite liek 2 find out sum dai.
An she grabz hold ov his cloths An he runz awai rly fast but she didnt letz go of his cloths so he left dem tehre An ran wai nekid An she got all pissed off An emo An stuffz.
An when i sed DO NOT WANT!!1!!!1! he got skeerd An ran awai An left his cloths here. Naked jospeh is..naked.
An when i sed DO NOT WANT!!!!!!! he left his cloths here An ran awai nekid. but she didnt tellz him she thot joseph wuz teh cute An he wuz rly totaly teh cute when he wuz all nekid An stuffz An she rly wantd to has sexxs wif him An she wuz bein wikkid evil bitch An tryin to getz him in trubl cuz she wuz all pissed off An stuff.
An teh bosscat of teh prison didnt haz to wry about teh dunjon ne mor; cuz Ceiling Cat wuz takin care ov joseph, An wot evr he did, Ceiling Cat wuz all kewl wif it.
An 1 nite teh butler d00d An teh bakr d00d bof had wierd dremz An teh butler d00d dremd about grapez An wien An teh baker d00d dremd about cookiez.
An he axt tehm y r u all sad An stuf 2dai?
An dey sed we can haz wierd dremz An we dont undrstanz dem An no 1 can tellz us wtf dey meanz. An Joseph sed Ceiling Cat knos wot dey meanz. tell me wot wuz dey about An i wil axt Ceiling Cat.
An I took teh grapes An maded wien An gaev it 2 pharo An pharo rly liekd it alot.
An cuz sum wikkid evil mean d00dz kidnapd me form teh land ov teh Hebrews An i didnt do ne wikkid evil stuf but dey puts me in teh dunjun ne wai.
An in teh top bukkit tehre wuz all kindz ov rly gud cookiez 4 pharo but he sed DO NOT WANT!!!!!!!!!! An he chopd of my hed An hung me on a tree An teh burds eated teh cookies out ov teh bukkitz.
An in 3 dais pharo wil chopz of ur hed An hang u on a tree An teh burds wil eatz u up An stuf liek u was cookies.
But he sed to teh baker d00d i dont liek u cuz u maded bad cookies An DO NOT WANT!!!!1!!!!1!: so he chopz off teh baker d00ds hed An hung him on a tree An teh burds eated him liek he wuz cookies, just liek Joseph sed.
but teh butler d00d wuz so xited he 4got 2 tellz pharo about Joseph.
An teh 7 skinny moocowz eated up teh 7 fat moocows. moocows dosent eats moocows irl but it wuz drem so dey cud eatz dem. An pharo woke up.
An teh 7 dryd up ears eated up teh 7 rly gud ears. cormz cant eatz othr cormz irl but it wuz drem so dey cud eated tehm. An pharo woke up An saw dat it wuz drem.
An in teh mornin he wuz all skeerd An emo An stuffz An he txtd all teh majic d00ds ov Egypt An all teh rly smrt geek d00ds An sed com 2 my base An pharo told tehm hiz drem; but no 1 cud tellz pharo wtf it meanz.
An wut he tellz us bout teh dremz happend irl, pharo tellz me iz ok i lieks u again An he letz me be butler d00d again but he chopd of teh bakers hed An hung him on a tree An teh burds eated him liek he wuz cookies.
Tehn pharo IMd teh bosscat of teh dunjun An sed tell Joseph to come ovr 2 my base, An dey took him out ov teh prison An he took baffs wich wuz ok cuz he wuz rly drty form bein in teh dunjun An besiedz he liekd baffs, An he shave his face cuz no 1 in egypt wuz muslimz yet An teh hebrooz wuznt rly jooz yet so dey didnt haz to has beardz An he put on sum noo clos An sum noo sneekz An went 2 pharos base.
An pharo sed 2 Joseph i can haz wierd dremz An no 1 can tellz me wtf it meanz An teh butler d00d tellz me u nos wtf drems meanz.
An Joseph sed i dono but i can axt Ceiling Cat An he wil tellz me wtf it meanz so u wil feelz betr An not b all skeerd An stuffz.
An aftr dey eated tehm up, dey wer stil all skinny liek dey didnt eated dem An tehn i woke up.
An teh 7 dryd up cormz eated up teh 7 rly gud cormz.. An i woke up An saw dat it wuz drem. An I tellz taht 2 teh majic d00dz An teh rly smrt geek d00dz but no 1 knoz wtf it meanz.
An teh 7 skinny ugly moocowz r 7 years; An teh 7 dryd up cormz meanz tehr wil b 7 bad years ov no cheezburgrz An no cookies.
An cuz pharo dremd teh sam drem 2x it meanz taht Ceiling Cat iz rly gonna do all taht rly soon. srsly.
An u wil haz lotz of fudz 4 teh 7 bad yearz of no cheezburgrz An no cookies so teh ppl in egypt wont b all hungry An starvin An dyin An stuffz. An dont wry, Ceiling Cat wil makez mirakel An teh icecreemz wont get all meltd An teh meeses wont getz in2 teh bildinz An eatz up all teh foodz An mek meese poopz all over it cuz dat wud rly suxx. srsly.
An pharo sed 2 his peepz, wehre can we find sum1 2 do all dis stuffs? An dey sed duh, getz joseph 2 do it.
i wil maeks u teh bosscat ov my base, An u wil tellz all teh ppl wot 2 do: im teh only 1 gonna b ur bosscat cuz i iz pharo.
An he gaev him his 2th best tricked out ride but it wuz chariot cuz carz hadnt ben nventd yet An wehn teh ppl seez him comin dey getz all xited An sez respekz tihs d00d cuz he iz bosscat ov all teh land ov Egypt.
An pharo sed u can has new naim, i wil callz u Zaphnath-paaneah wich iz rly hard 2 speel but teh egipshunz had rly weird riting taht wuz all maed out ov pitchurs nsted ov lettrz; An he letz him marry Asenath wich is rly wierd naim 4 a grrrl cuz it soundz kind ov drty An he finaly found out bout “PENIS GOES WHERE?!” An she wuz teh daughter ov Poti-pherah wich soundz kind ov drty 2 An he wuz priest ov On wich isnt hard 2 speel An dosent soundz drty. An Joseph sed kthxbai An went all ovr teh land ov Egypt in his tricked out ride tellin all teh peepz wot 2 do An stuff An dey sed k.
An Joseph puts so meny bukkitz An bukkitzz ov cormz in tehr taht no 1 cud countz tehm. wich wuz gud cuz popcorm had ben nventd An all teh peeps liekd 2 eatz popcorm wen dey wuz watchin dere dvdz An stuf An wehn dey axidently dropz popcormz on teh flor teh kittehs thinkx itz toyz An lieks to playz wif it but dey duznt lieks 2 eatz it.
An he naimd teh 2th kid Ephraim cuz he sed it meanz Ceiling Cat gaev me lotz An lotz of gud stuffz so mai lief dosent suxx no mor.
An wen all teh peepz in Egypt gotz hungry, dey sed 2 pharo we can haz cheezburgr? An pharo sed go 2 Joseph cuz he is bosscat ov u An do wot evr he sez. An dey sed kthxbai..
An all teh peepz form teh hol urthz cam 2 Egypt 2 by ppl fudz An catfoodz An catnipz An stuffs cuz der wuz hungryz An starvashunz An bad stufz liek taht all ovr teh urths An joseph sed u can haz cheezburgrz An cookies An cakez An icecreemz An katfudz An catnipz An stuf An dey gaev him lotz ov moneyz An evry1 sed kthxbai.
yo d00dz, i hurd dat tehr iz fudz An catnipz An stuff in egypt. go tehre An buy sum so we wont b all hungry An starving An gettin ded An stuffs. An dont 4gets teh cat foodz An teh catnipz cuz teh kittehs iz all hungry An starvin An stuf 2.
An jacobz sons went wif alot of othr peepz 2 by foodz An stuff in egypt cuz lotz of otehr ppl in canaan wuz all hungry An starvin.
An wehn Joseph seez his bros, he decieded 2 fakez dem out so he made liek he didnt knos dem An he wuz all liek i iz bosscat kiss my butt An he axt dem wehre u caemz form? An they sed from Canaan An we wantz 2 buy f00dz An stuffz cuz our peeps An kittehs iz all hungry An starvin An stuff.
An Joseph sed u iz spyz, u jus wantz 2 seez if my peepz iz all hungry An starvin An gettin ded liek all teh ohter ppl.
We r all bros An we iz gud d00dz An not spyz.
An he sed no wai, u iz spyz.
An they sed we r 12 bros but our kid bro is bak at our old manz base An one ov our bros got ded long tiem ago.
An teh cheef ov poleesez puts tehm in teh dunjon 4 3 dais.
An they sed 2 each otehr, We rly fuxxed up wif our othr bro An didnt lissen 2 him An we did wikkid mean evil stuf 2 him An nao we iz scrood. srsly.
An dey didnt kno dat Joseph undrstoodz dem.
An joseph sed xqz me gotta go 2 teh sandboks brb An tehn he got all sad An emo An stuff An cryed but he didnt letz dem seez An den he cam bak An took hiz bro Simeon An puts him bak in teh dunjon.
An his bros filz up all tehr bukkitz wif teh foodz An stuf An sed gon 2 canaan kthxbai.
An he sed wtf i has a money in my bukkit wif teh f00dz An dey gotz all skeerd An almos had heart attaxz An stuf An dey sed Ceiling Cat An teh bosscat ov egypt mus b messin wif us.
we iz 12 bros but 1 of dem got ded An our kidbro is bak at our old manz base.
An bring ur kid bro bak 2 my base so i wil know taht u r gud d00dz An not spyz An i wil letz ur otehr bro out ov teh prison An u can hangz out in egypt k?
An Jacob sed wtf Joseph is ded An Simeon iz in teh prison An u will taek Benjamin 2 egypt An prity soon all my kidz wil be gon.
An Reuben sed if benjamin getz ded u can pwnz my 2 kidz. i wil maek shur he getz bak to our base An not getz pwnzd.
An he sed no wai, his othr bro is ded An he no can haz no mor bros An if sum1 pwnz him i wil has heart atakxz An getz ded 2.
An l8r wen dey had eated up all teh fudz dey got form egypt, jacob sed 2 his kidz go bak 2 egypt An say we can has mor cheezburgrz An cookies An stuff?.
but liek i jus sed teh mean bosscat d00d sez, if ben dosent com wif us we no can goes bak.
An Israel whos rael naim wuz jacob sed wtf u st00pid n00bz, y u tellz bosscat u haz othr bro?
An dey sed teh bosscat axt us bout our famly An wantd 2 kno if our old manz wuz aliev or not An if we haz nothr bro An stuf An we sed yes cuz Ceiling Cat sez u no tellz lies speshly 2 bosscat. An we didnt kno bosscat wud tellz us bring ur otehr bro 2 my base or u no can haz cheezburgrs An cookies An stufz. srsly.
see, if we tookz him wif us b4 we cud alrdy haz mor cheezburgrz An cookies An stuffz.
An i wil axt Ceiling Cat Almighty 2 mek bosscat not b mean d00d An letz all ov u comz bak saef. If u getz pwnzd i wil be all sad An emo An can haz hart atacxx An stufz but wtf if u duznt go i wil getz ded form hungrz An starvashunz newai. cul8r bai.
An when joseph seez all hiz broz An evn hiz kidbro, he sed 2 hiz butler d00d, u taekz htese hebroo d00dz bak 2 my base An mekz sum cheezburgrz An cookies An stufs cuz iz lunch tiem An dese menz iz can haz lunch wif me.
An all teh bros wuz skeerd An they sed oh noes, bosscat iz mean d00d An mai b he knos bout teh moneyz wut wuz wif teh f00dz wehn we wnet bak 2 our base An mai b he wil getz teh cheef of poleesez 2 trhow us bak in teh dunjun An taht wil rly suxxz. srsly.
cuz we r gud menz An dosent kno who puts teh moneyz bak in our bukkits An we didnt steelz nethin.
An teh butlr sed dont wry, ur Ceiling Cat tellz me put teh moneyz bak in tehr wif teh foodz An i sed k. An he sed simeon com out here ur bros iz her An he sed k.
An teh butler d00d sez iz lunch tiem An u can haz cheezburgrz An cookies An stuf An dey sed kewl, thx.
An he axt dem how r u doin An howz ur old man An is he stil aliev.
An dey sed he iz ok jus hungryz An stuf liek all teh otehr ppl An they bowed down 2 him again cuz dey wuz all skeerd An stuf.
An Joseph sed xqz me gotz to go 2 sandbockz brb An he went An got all emo An cryed An stuff.
An he cam bak An sed itz lunch tiem An we can haz cheezburgrz An cookiez An stufz.
An joseph gaev evry1 lotz of fudz An stuffz but he gaev teh most foodz 2 benjamin cuz he raely liekd him alot. An dey can haz wien An cakez An icecereemz An stuffz liek it waz burfdai prty or sumthin An dey wuz all happy An stufs cuz bosscat didnt pwnzd tehm or trhowz dem in teh dunjun An othr mean stuff.
An put my favorit silver cup in teh kidbros bukkit wif hiz moneyz An he sed k.
did u steelz bosscats favrit silver cup wen u wuz in hiz base eatin ur lunchs? iz wikkid An evil An ur Ceiling Cat sez u no steelz stuf form ppl, rite?.
look in all our bukkitz An if u findz it u can pwnz who evr haz it An u can puts us bak in teh dunjon k?.
An he sed I iz not mean d00d so i jus puts teh 1 who stol it bak in teh prison An all u othr d00dz can goes bak 2 ur old manz base k?
den dey got all skeerd An took all teh foodz An catnipz An stufz bak 2 teh city.
An Joseph sed wtf u did? dont u knos i iz majik d00d An can seez stuff liek taht?
An Judah sed we no steelz nething An u gotz 2 bleev us. Ceiling Cat knos wot happnd An if we steelz nethin u can pwnz us or puts us bak in teh dunjun or wotevr.
An Joseph sed ur Ceiling Cat tellz me not 2 pwnz u. but teh d00d wot steeld my favrit cup haz 2 goes 2 teh prison An teh rest of u can goes bak 2 ur old manz base.
An we sed our old man iz stil aliev An we hav a kid bro An his otehr bro who haz teh same momcat got ded long tiem ago An he iz teh only 1 who has teh same momcat An our old man rly luvs him alot. srsly.
An wen we wnet bak 2 our old manz base we told him wot u sed An he wuz all skeerd An stuffz An sez i no can lets him goes cuz sum1 mite pwnz him or crocodielz or lions or lolrusz mite eatz him.
An we sed we no can goes bak tehre cuz teh bosscat wuz mean d00d An he sed if u no brngz ur 
An if his kid bro getz ded i wil be so sad An emo An stuffz, i can has hart attackxxz An stuf An get ded.
so i sed to our old man i wil taeks caer ov him An if he getz ded u can pwnz me or wot evr.
see i no can goes bak to our old manz base if our kid bro no can goes 2. cus liek i jus sed our old man can has hart attakxxxz An get ded An DO NOT WANT!!!!11!!!!
An he got all emo. srsly. An he cryed An stufz An all teh Egyptians in pharos base hurd him but taht wuz k cuz menz wuz aloud 2 cryz back in teh day.
An Joseph said hai, I iz ur bro Joseph. iz our old man stil aliev? An his bros wuz getin all skeerd An stufz An didnt knoes wtf 2 do.
An Ceiling Cat wantd me 2 mek shur hter wil b enuf cheezburgrz An cookies An cornz An katfudz An catnipz An stuffs so teh peepz An teh kittehs wont get ded form teh hungrz An starvashunz.
An i wil givz u lotz of cheezburgrz An cookies An cornz An catf00dz An catnipz cuz htere wil b 5 mor yrs ov hungerz An starvashunz An no cheezburgrz An no cookies An if u staiz in canaan u mite get ded form teh hungrz An starvashunz An DO NOT WANT!!!1111!!!!!!
An tell our old man taht im in ur egyptz bein teh bosscat An teh egypt is gud place 4 base An he shud com here rite awai.
An all his otehr bros got all emo 2 An it wuz rly rly huggz tiem. srsly.
An bringz him An all ur famlyz An moocows An sheepz An kittehs bak 2 egypt: An I wil maekz base 4 htem An dey can has lotz ov cheezburgrz An cookies An cornz An catf00ds An catnipz An stuf.
An tel tehm dont wry about all ur otehr stufs cuz u can has all new stuffs form teh egyptz. An not walmart stuffz either, u can haz teh rly gud stuf liek bloomingdalez An nieman marcus.
An dey sed kthx gon 2 canaan brb An he sed wach out An dont letz ne1 pwnz u An dont letz teh crocodielz An teh lionz An teh lolruses eatz u k bai.
An Israel whos rael naim wuz Jacob sed how kewl is taht! Joseph iz aliev An iz bosscat of all teh egyptz. w00t! i can goes 2 seez him An b wif him An haz noo base b4 i get ded.
An Israel whos rael naim wuz jacob taekz all hiz wiefs An hiz kidz An ther wiefs An hter kidz An his kittehs An hiz moo cowz An his sheeplz An stufs An said gon 2 egyptz An not brb k bai. An dey caem to Beer-sheba An jacob sed we can has bbq An htey burnt up a moocow An a sheepl An lotz ov catnipz An Ceiling Cat sed kthx ur rly g00d peepz An i lieks u alot.
An Ceiling Cat sed Jacob, Jacob. An he sed im in ur beersheba lissenin 2 Ceiling Cat.
I wil b in ur egyptz watchin ovr u An ur peepz. An evry wher els 2.
An all hiz wiefs An hiz kidz An ther wiefs An teh hol famlyz sed gone 2 egyptz An not brb kbai. An wuz alrdy big famlyz cuz jacob can has 4 wiefs An dey did alot ov PENIS GOES WHERE?! srsly.
An htese are all ov jacobs peepz. An most ov dem has wierd naemz cuz teh 1th peepz who rited teh bibbl can haz weird alfabetz.
jacobs kid Reuben who wuz not sammich had teh kidz Hanoch An Phallu An Hezron An Carmi.
An jacobs kid Simeon had teh kidz Jemuel An Jamin An Ohad An Jachin An Zohar An Shaul.
An jacobs kid Levi who wuz not pantz had teh kidz Gershon An Kohath An Merari.
An jacobs kid Judah had teh kidz Er An Onan An Shelah An Pharez An Zerah but Er An Onan wuz alrdy got ded. An Pharez had teh kidz Hezron An Hamul.
An jacobs kid Issachar had teh kidz Tola An Phuvah An Job who wuz a rael piece ov werk An Shimron.
An jacobs kid Zebulun had teh kidz Sered An Elon An Jahleel.
An htose kids momcat wuz Leah An hter sis wuz Dinah so tehr wuz 30 An 3 ov dem countin all teh kidz kidz.
An jacobs kid Gad had teh kidz Ziphion An Haggi An Shuni An Ezbon An Eri An Arodi An Areli.
An jacobs kid Asher had teh kidz Jimnah An Ishuah An Isui An Beriah An Serah ther sis. An Beriah had teh kidz Heber An Malchiel.
An thos kidz momcat wuz Zilpah An tehr wuz 16 ov em countin all teh kids kidz.
An jacobs kid Joseph had teh kidz Manasseh An Ephraim in teh egpyt An ther momcat wuz Asenath.
An jacobs kid Benjamin did alot ov PENIS GOES WHERE!? An had teh kidz Bela who wuz not dracula An Becher An Ashbel An Gera An Naaman An Ehi An Rosh An Muppim who wuz not muppet An Huppim An Ard.
so countin all teh kidz kidz ther wuz 14 of dem.
An jacobs kid Dan had teh kid Hushim.
An jacobs kid Naphtali had teh kidz Jahzeel An Guni An Jezer An Shillem.
An bilhah wuz tehr momcat.
An liek i sed b4, Joseph had 2 kidz in teh egyptz. so jacob can has 60 An 10 ppl in his hol famlyz but  is k u no duz teh maths.
An Joseph can has chariot cuz cars wuznt inventd yet An he sed 2 pharo gon 2 goshen brb An wnet 2 see his old man An dey got all emo An it wuz huggz tiem An dey cryed alot cuz dey wuz all happie An xited An stuff.
An jacob sed thx muchz to Ceiling Cat cuz i can seez joseph agin An he iz aliev An i can gets ded from bein all hapy An xcited An stuf..
An u tellz dem we is shepherds An has lotz ov moo cowz An sheeps so pharo wil sai i maek ur base in teh land of Goshen cuz teh gypshuns gots dis wierd thing bout shepherdz An dey liek 2 eat sheeplz An moocows but htey dosent liek 2 liv wif dem An dey will say DO NOT WANT!111!!!!!!!!.
An he taekz 5 ov his bros 2 seez pharo.
An dey sed we use to liv in teh canaan but u tellz us we can has base in teh egpytz cuz our moocows dosent has ne f00dz An dey wil get ded if we stais ther so pls we can has base in goshen?.
An u iz rly gud d00d An i liekz u alot so ur old man An ur bros can has rly gud base in Goshen: An dey can b bosscats of all my moo cows An sheeplz 2.
An pharo axt Jacob how old r u?
An Jacob sed 2 pharo gon 2 goshen kthxbai.
An Joseph took caer ov his old man An his bros An all his old mans famlyz An gaev htem lotz of cheezburgrs An cookies An corns An stufffz. An catfudz An catnips 4 teh kittehs 2.
An dey didnt has ne mor moneys. An l8r all teh Egyptians caem 2 Joseph An sed we can has cheesburgrz An cookies An stuffz? cuz we r all hungry An starvin An stufz but we dosent has ne mor moneyz An f00d stamps haznt ben nvntd yet An evn all our moocowz is all hungryz An starvin cuz tehr iznt evn ne gras left cuz dey eated it all An we evn eated sum ov it.
An dey sed k An joesph can has all tehr horses An sheepz An moo cows An donkyz An Joseph gaev htem cheezburgrz An cookies An cornz An catfoods An stufs An 4 a hol yeer.
othr wiez we will all get ded form teh hungryz An teh strvashunz. so u can haz all our base An we can has cheezbugrz An cookies An stuf k? An we can has seedz 2 An we wil werk on all teh farmz 4 pharo kkkkk?
but pharo sed 2 joeph u no can haz fake Ceiling Cats bases cuz fake Ceiling Cats wil get all pissed off An stuf. but pharo didnt kno taht fake Ceiling Cats wuz fake Ceiling Cats he thot htey wer rael An he wuz all skeerd An stufs. so he didnt taekd fake Ceiling Cats bases.
An sum of ur vegbatels An froots is blong 2 pharo An teh rest is blong 2 u so u An ur famlyz wont b all hungry An starvin An stuff.
An they sed thx muchz u is rly gud d00d, u tek caer of us An we will werks 4 pharo An we wont b all starvin nao. kthxbai.
An htats how dey stil duz thingz in teh egyptz. sum of teh f00dz is belong 2 pharo An teh rest is blong 2 teh ppl but all fake Ceiling Catz base is stil blong 2 fake Ceiling Cats.
An teh isrealitz livd in goshen long tiem An they hadz lotz An lotz of moneys An stuff An dey did alot of PENIS GOES WHERE??! An had lotz An lotz of kidz. srsly.
but u bury me wif my old man in teh canaan An joseph sed k.
An jacob sed Ceiling Cat is watchin u An if u dont do htat den Ceiling Cat wil be all pissed off An stuff An maybe he evn meks u ded. 4 rael. den jacob sed u r rly gud kid. An den jacob wuz all tired cuz he wuz rly old d00d An he sed nitey nite An wnet 2 sleepz.
an sed 2 me, im goin 2 mak u rly rich d00d an will increase ur cheezburgerz and childrenz. Im gonna mak u mod ov all tha interweb, an im gonna giv dis land as an evrlastin posesshun 2 ur descendants aftr u. srsly. Essept mebe otha peepol will also say iz their posesshun and will be lots of MORTAL KOMBAT and stuffs but otha than thats its your posseshun srsly.
anywayz, as i wuz returnin frum paddan (they haz good barz there),  2 mah DO NOT WANT rachel go wai and be ded in da land ov canaan while we wuz still on teh wai, lil distance frum efrath, and rly rly far frum antartica. So i burid her like turd thar beside teh road 2 efrath" (dat iz, bethlehem, also vry vry far from antratica...srlsy).
nao israels eyez wuz not wurkin so good cuz ov old age and cuz he spends lots of taim on intraweb lookings at lolcat pagez, an he cud hardly c. srlsy. So joseph brought his sons close 2 him, an his fathr kisd them an embracd them an snorgled them and then forgoted their names cuz hes rly rly rly old.
but israel reachd out his rite hand an put it on efraims head, though he wuz teh youngr, an evn tho he had jus used that hand to scratch hrballz, an crosin his arms like macarena, he puted his left hand on manasehs head, even though manaseh wuz teh firstborn and even tho he had lice.
but his fathr was all laik, REQUEST DENIED an sed, "i knoe, mah son, i knoe. I r not dummy head. He 2 will become peeps, an he 2 will become great like man who invented flee collars. but, his youngr brothr will be greatr than he, and always win at pokemonz and get hottest date at promz, an his childrenz will become group ov nashuns and will listen to music he no likez"
An cuz u iz bosscat i giv teh ridge ov land i took frum teh amoritez wif mah sword an mah bow (An mai aroz 2 cuz bo wfout arros duznt werkz gud) an mah gat."
but ur kittehs won't have cheezburgrz cuz u peed in mai bedz!  An scratched mai couch!"
So ur cursed an ur baby kittehs will be scattrd an not frenz."
an milk an wine!"
"Zebuluns kittehs can has hoem by the sea an can has boats to play with."
an wantz to rest an so will be servant an licks feetz."
He can be serpentcat and bitez teh horses so ridrs fall LOL!"
I can haz salvation yet, ceiling cat?
"Gad, a walrus take ur bukket!  But u can haz it bak."
"Asher kittehs are roly-poly!  LOL They maded cookies but eated them."
"Napthali, ur bum iz gassy.  But u talk nice, so iz k."
An u can haz ur dads cheezburgrz an ur bros not haev em."
"Benjamin huntz wild cheezburgrz at nite!  LOL!"
An the 12 kittehs eated cheezburgrz from dads.
An he went teh ded.
dadz sed u gots burry me in Canaan so I taek him out of ur place an burry him in Canaan but I coem back kthxbai"
an Pharaoh said "k"
an with the walrus and hiz bukket an dey were lotz of kittehs
cuz deyd carreed him there
dunt werry I give u cheezburgrz" an he gaev em cheezburgrz
an he died an dey put him in a box
No princípio, criou Deus os céus e a terra.
E a terra era sem forma e vazia; e {havia} trevas sobre a face do abismo; e o Espírito de Deus se movia sobre a face das águas.
E disse Deus: Haja luz. E houve luz.
E viu Deus que era boa a luz; e fez Deus separação entre a luz e as trevas.
E Deus chamou à luz Dia; e às trevas chamou Noite. E foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia primeiro.
E disse Deus: Haja uma expansão no meio das águas, e haja separação entre águas e águas.
E fez Deus a expansão e fez separação entre as águas que {estavam} debaixo da expansão e as águas que {estavam} sobre a expansão. E assim foi.
E chamou Deus à expansão Céus; e foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia segundo.
E disse Deus: Ajuntem-se as águas debaixo dos céus num lugar; e apareça a {porção} seca. E assim foi.
E chamou Deus à {porção} seca Terra; e ao ajuntamento das águas chamou Mares. E viu Deus que era bom.
E disse Deus: Produza a terra erva verde, erva que dê semente, árvore frutífera que dê fruto segundo a sua espécie, cuja semente esteja nela sobre a terra. E assim foi.
E a terra produziu erva, erva dando semente conforme a sua espécie e árvore frutífera, cuja semente {está} nela conforme a sua espécie. E viu Deus que era bom.
E foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia terceiro.
E disse Deus: Haja luminares na expansão dos céus, para haver separação entre o dia e a noite; e sejam eles para sinais e para tempos {ou estações} determinados e para dias e anos.
E sejam para luminares na expansão dos céus, para alumiar a terra. E assim foi.
E fez Deus os dois grandes luminares: o luminar maior para governar o dia, e o luminar menor para governar a noite; e fez as estrelas.
E Deus os pôs na expansão dos céus para alumiar a terra,
e para governar o dia e a noite, e para fazer separação entre a luz e as trevas. E viu Deus que era bom.
E foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia quarto.
E disse Deus: Produzam as águas abundantemente répteis {ou criaturas viventes, que se movem} de alma vivente; e voem as aves sobre a face da expansão dos céus.
E Deus criou as {ou os monstros dos mares} grandes baleias, e todo réptil de alma vivente que as águas abundantemente produziram conforme as suas espécies, e toda ave de asas conforme a sua espécie. E viu Deus que era bom.
E Deus os abençoou, dizendo: Frutificai, e multiplicai-vos, e enchei as águas nos mares; e as aves se multipliquem na terra.
E foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia quinto.
E disse Deus: Produza a terra alma vivente conforme a sua espécie; gado, e répteis, e bestas-feras da terra conforme a sua espécie. E assim foi.
E fez Deus as bestas-feras da terra conforme a sua espécie, e o gado conforme a sua espécie, e todo o réptil da terra conforme a sua espécie. E viu Deus que era bom.
E disse Deus: Façamos o homem à nossa imagem, conforme a nossa semelhança; e domine sobre os peixes do mar, e sobre as aves dos céus, e sobre o gado, e sobre toda a terra, e sobre todo réptil que se move {ou roja} sobre a terra.
E criou Deus o homem à sua imagem; à imagem de Deus o criou; macho e fêmea os criou.
E Deus os abençoou e Deus lhes disse: Frutificai, e multiplicai-vos, e enchei a terra, e sujeitai-a; e dominai sobre os peixes do mar, e sobre as aves dos céus, e sobre todo o animal que se move sobre a terra.
E disse Deus: Eis que vos tenho dado toda erva que dá semente e que {está} sobre a face de toda a terra e toda árvore em que há fruto de árvore que dá semente; ser-vos-ão para mantimento.
E a todo animal da terra, e a toda ave dos céus, e a todo réptil da terra, em que há alma vivente, toda a erva verde {lhes será} para mantimento. E assim foi.
E viu Deus tudo quanto tinha feito, e eis que era muito bom; e foi a tarde e a manhã: o dia sexto.
Assim, os céus, e a terra, e todo o seu exército foram acabados.
E, havendo Deus acabado no dia sétimo a sua obra, que tinha feito, descansou no sétimo dia de toda a sua obra, que tinha feito.
E abençoou Deus o dia sétimo e o santificou; porque nele descansou de toda a sua obra, que Deus criara e fizera.
Estas são as origens {ou gerações} dos céus e da terra, quando foram criados; no dia em que o SENHOR {Heb. JEOVÁ} Deus fez a terra e os céus.
Toda planta do campo ainda não estava na terra, e toda erva do campo ainda não brotava; porque {ainda} o SENHOR Deus não tinha feito chover sobre a terra, e não havia homem para lavrar a terra.
Um vapor, porém, subia da terra e regava toda a face da terra.
E formou o SENHOR Deus o homem do pó da terra e soprou em seus narizes o fôlego da vida; e o homem foi feito alma vivente.
E plantou o SENHOR Deus um jardim no Éden, da banda do Oriente, e pôs ali o homem que tinha formado.
E o SENHOR Deus fez brotar da terra toda árvore agradável à vista e boa para comida, e a árvore da vida no meio do jardim, e a árvore da ciência {ou conhecimento} do bem e do mal.
E saía um rio do Éden para regar o jardim; e dali se dividia e se tornava em quatro braços.
O nome do primeiro {é} Pisom; este é o que rodeia toda a terra de Havilá, onde {há} ouro.
E o ouro dessa terra {é} bom; ali {há} o bdélio e a {ou o ônix, ou o berilo} pedra sardônica.
E o nome do segundo rio {é} Giom; este é o que rodeia toda a terra de Cuxe. {ou Etiópia}
E o nome do terceiro rio {é} Hidéquel; {ou Tigre} este é o que vai para a banda do oriente da Assíria; e o quarto rio é o Eufrates.
E tomou o SENHOR Deus o homem e o pôs no jardim do Éden para o lavrar e o guardar.
E ordenou o SENHOR Deus ao homem, dizendo: De toda árvore do jardim comerás livremente,
mas da árvore da ciência do bem e do mal, dela não comerás; porque, no dia em que dela comeres, certamente morrerás.
E disse o SENHOR Deus: Não é bom que o homem esteja só; far-lhe-ei uma adjutora {que esteja} {ou lhe assista} como diante dele.
Havendo, pois, o SENHOR Deus formado da terra todo animal do campo e toda ave dos céus, {os} trouxe a Adão, para {este} ver como lhes chamaria; e tudo o que Adão chamou a toda a alma vivente, isso foi o seu nome.
E Adão pôs os nomes a todo o gado, e às aves dos céus, e a todo animal do campo; mas para o homem não se achava adjutora {que estivesse} como diante dele.
Então, o SENHOR Deus fez cair um sono pesado sobre Adão, e {este} adormeceu; e tomou uma das suas costelas e cerrou a carne em seu lugar.
E da costela que o SENHOR Deus tomou do homem formou {Heb. edificou} uma mulher; e trouxe-a a Adão.
E disse Adão: Esta é agora osso dos meus ossos e carne da minha carne; esta será chamada varoa, porquanto do varão foi tomada.
Portanto, deixará o varão o seu pai e a sua mãe e apegar-se-á à sua mulher, e serão ambos uma carne.
E ambos estavam nus, o homem e a sua mulher; e não se envergonhavam.
Ora, a serpente era mais astuta que todas as alimárias do campo que o SENHOR Deus tinha feito. E esta disse à mulher: É assim que Deus disse: Não comereis de toda árvore do jardim?
E disse a mulher à serpente: Do fruto das árvores do jardim comeremos,
mas, do fruto da árvore que está no meio do jardim, disse Deus: Não comereis dele, nem nele tocareis, para que não morrais.
Então, a serpente disse à mulher: Certamente não morrereis.
Porque Deus sabe que, no dia em que dele comerdes, se abrirão os vossos olhos, e sereis como Deus, sabendo o bem e o mal.
E, vendo a mulher que aquela árvore {era} boa para se comer, e agradável aos olhos, e árvore desejável para dar entendimento, tomou do seu fruto, e comeu, e deu também a seu marido, e {ele} comeu com ela.
Então, foram abertos os olhos de ambos, e conheceram que {estavam} nus; e coseram folhas de figueira, e fizeram para si aventais. {ou cintas}
E ouviram a voz do SENHOR Deus, que passeava no jardim pela viração do dia; e escondeu-se Adão e sua mulher da presença do SENHOR Deus, entre as árvores do jardim.
E chamou o SENHOR Deus a Adão e disse-lhe: Onde estás?
E ele disse: Ouvi a tua voz soar no jardim, e temi, porque estava nu, e escondi-me.
E Deus disse: Quem te mostrou que estavas nu? Comeste tu da árvore de que te ordenei que não comesses?
Então, disse Adão: A mulher que me deste por companheira, ela me deu da árvore, e comi.
E disse o SENHOR Deus à mulher: Por que fizeste isso? E disse a mulher: A serpente me enganou, e eu comi.
Então, o SENHOR Deus disse à serpente: Porquanto fizeste isso, maldita {serás} mais que toda besta e mais que todos os animais do campo; sobre o teu ventre andarás e pó comerás todos os dias da tua vida.
E porei inimizade entre ti e a mulher e entre a tua semente e a sua semente; esta {Heb. ele} te ferirá a cabeça, e tu lhe ferirás o calcanhar.
E à mulher disse: Multiplicarei grandemente a tua dor e a tua conceição; com dor terás filhos; e o teu desejo será para o teu marido, e ele te dominará.
E a Adão disse: Porquanto deste ouvidos à voz de tua mulher e comeste da árvore de que te ordenei, dizendo: Não comerás dela, maldita {é} a terra por causa de ti; com dor comerás dela todos os dias da tua vida.
Espinhos e cardos também te produzirá; e comerás a erva do campo.
No suor do teu rosto, comerás o teu pão, até que te tornes à terra; porque dela foste tomado, porquanto és pó e em pó te tornarás.
E chamou Adão o nome de sua mulher Eva, {que significa vida ou mãe da vida} porquanto ela era a mãe de todos os viventes.
E fez o SENHOR Deus a Adão e a sua mulher túnicas de peles e os vestiu.
Então, disse o SENHOR Deus: Eis que o homem é como um de nós, sabendo o bem e o mal; ora, pois, para que não estenda a sua mão, e tome também da árvore da vida, e coma, e viva eternamente,
o SENHOR Deus, pois, o lançou fora do jardim do Éden, para lavrar a terra, de que fora tomado.
E, havendo lançado fora o homem, pôs querubins ao oriente do jardim do Éden e uma espada inflamada que andava ao redor, para guardar o caminho da árvore da vida.
E conheceu Adão a Eva, sua mulher, e ela concebeu, e teve a Caim, {que significa aquisição} e disse: Alcancei do SENHOR um varão.
E teve mais a seu irmão Abel; {que significa vaidade} e Abel foi pastor de ovelhas, e Caim foi lavrador da terra.
E aconteceu, ao cabo de dias, que Caim trouxe do fruto da terra uma oferta ao SENHOR.
E Abel também trouxe dos primogênitos das suas ovelhas e da sua gordura; e atentou o SENHOR para Abel e para a sua oferta.
Mas para Caim e para a sua oferta não atentou. E irou-se Caim fortemente, e descaiu-lhe o seu semblante.
E o SENHOR disse a Caim: Por que te iraste? E por que descaiu o teu semblante?
Se bem fizeres, não haverá aceitação {ou remissão} para ti? E, se não fizeres bem, o pecado jaz à porta, e para ti será o seu desejo, e sobre ele dominarás.
E falou Caim com o seu irmão Abel; e sucedeu que, estando eles no campo, se levantou Caim contra o seu irmão Abel e o matou.
E disse o SENHOR a Caim: Onde está Abel, teu irmão? E ele disse: Não sei; sou eu guardador do meu irmão?
E disse Deus: Que fizeste? A voz do sangue do teu irmão clama a mim desde a terra.
E agora maldito {és} tu desde a terra, que abriu a sua boca para receber da tua mão o sangue do teu irmão.
Quando lavrares a terra, não te dará mais a sua força; fugitivo e errante serás na terra.
Então, disse Caim ao SENHOR: É maior a minha maldade que a que possa ser {ou suportar} perdoada.
Eis que hoje me lanças da face da terra, e da tua face me esconderei; e serei fugitivo e errante na terra, e será que todo aquele que me achar me matará.
O SENHOR, porém, disse-lhe: Portanto, qualquer que matar a Caim sete vezes será castigado. {ou vingado} E pôs o SENHOR um sinal em Caim, para que não o ferisse qualquer que o achasse.
E saiu Caim de diante da face do SENHOR e habitou na terra de Node, da banda do oriente do Éden.
E conheceu Caim a sua mulher, e ela concebeu e teve a Enoque; e ele edificou uma cidade e chamou o nome da cidade pelo nome de seu filho Enoque.
E a Enoque nasceu Irade, e Irade gerou a Meujael, e Meujael gerou a Metusael, e Metusael gerou a Lameque.
E tomou Lameque para si duas mulheres; o nome de uma era Ada, e o nome da outra, Zilá.
E Ada teve a Jabal; este foi o pai dos que habitam em tendas e {têm} gado.
E o nome do seu irmão era Jubal; este foi o pai de todos os que tocam harpa e órgão.
E Zilá também teve a Tubalcaim, mestre de toda obra de cobre e de ferro; e a irmã de Tubalcaim {foi} Naamá.
E disse Lameque a suas mulheres: Ada e Zilá, ouvi a minha voz; vós, mulheres de Lameque, escutai o meu dito: porque eu matei um varão, por me ferir, e um jovem, por me pisar.
Porque sete vezes Caim será vingado; {ou castigado} mas Lameque, setenta vezes sete.
E tornou Adão a conhecer a sua mulher; e ela teve um filho e chamou o seu nome Sete; {que significa compensação ou renovo} porque, disse ela, Deus me deu outra semente em lugar de Abel; porquanto Caim o matou.
E a Sete mesmo também nasceu um filho; e chamou o seu nome Enos; então, se começou a invocar o nome do SENHOR.
Este é o livro das gerações de Adão. No dia em que Deus criou o homem, à semelhança de Deus o fez.
Macho e fêmea os criou, e os abençoou, e chamou o seu nome Adão, no dia em que foram criados.
E Adão viveu cento e trinta anos, e gerou um {filho} à sua semelhança, conforme a sua imagem, e chamou o seu nome Sete.
E foram os dias de Adão, depois que gerou a Sete, oitocentos anos, e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias que Adão viveu novecentos e trinta anos; e morreu.
E viveu Sete cento e cinco anos e gerou a Enos.
E viveu Sete, depois que gerou a Enos, oitocentos e sete anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Sete novecentos e doze anos; e morreu.
E viveu Enos noventa anos; e gerou a Cainã.
E viveu Enos, depois que gerou a Cainã, oitocentos e quinze anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Enos novecentos e cinco anos; e morreu.
E viveu Cainã setenta anos e gerou a Maalalel.
E viveu Cainã, depois que gerou a Maalalel, oitocentos e quarenta anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Cainã novecentos e dez anos; e morreu.
E viveu Maalalel sessenta e cinco anos e gerou a Jarede.
E viveu Maalalel, depois que gerou a Jarede, oitocentos e trinta anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Maalalel oitocentos e noventa e cinco anos; e morreu.
E viveu Jarede cento e sessenta e dois anos e gerou a Enoque.
E viveu Jarede, depois que gerou a Enoque, oitocentos anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Jarede novecentos e sessenta e dois anos; e morreu.
E viveu Enoque sessenta e cinco anos e gerou a Metusalém.
E andou Enoque com Deus, depois que gerou a Metusalém, trezentos anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Enoque trezentos e sessenta e cinco anos.
E andou Enoque com Deus; e não se viu {mais,} porquanto Deus {para si} o tomou.
E viveu Metusalém cento e oitenta e sete anos e gerou a Lameque.
E viveu Metusalém, depois que gerou a Lameque, setecentos e oitenta e dois anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Metusalém novecentos e sessenta e nove anos; e morreu.
E viveu Lameque cento e oitenta e dois anos e gerou um filho.
E chamou o seu nome Noé, {Heb. Noah, que significa repouso} dizendo: Este nos consolará acerca de nossas obras e do trabalho de nossas mãos, por causa da terra que o SENHOR amaldiçoou.
E viveu Lameque, depois que gerou a Noé, quinhentos e noventa e cinco anos e gerou filhos e filhas.
E foram todos os dias de Lameque setecentos e setenta e sete anos; e morreu.
E era Noé da idade de quinhentos anos e gerou Noé a Sem, Cam e Jafé.
E aconteceu que, como os homens começaram a multiplicar-se sobre a face da terra, e lhes nasceram filhas,
viram os filhos de Deus que as filhas dos homens eram formosas; e tomaram para si mulheres de todas as que escolheram.
Então, disse o SENHOR: Não contenderá {ou permanecerá} o meu Espírito para sempre com o homem, porque ele também {é} carne; porém os seus dias serão cento e vinte anos.
Havia, naqueles dias, gigantes na terra; e também depois, quando os filhos de Deus entraram às filhas dos homens e {delas} geraram {filhos;} estes {eram} os valentes que houve na antiguidade, os varões de fama.
E viu o SENHOR que a maldade do homem se multiplicara sobre a terra e que toda imaginação dos pensamentos de seu coração era só má continuamente.
Então, arrependeu-se o SENHOR de haver feito o homem sobre a terra, e pesou-lhe em seu coração.
E disse o SENHOR: Destruirei, de sobre a face da terra, o homem que criei, desde o homem até ao animal, até ao réptil e até à ave dos céus; porque me arrependo de os haver feito.
Noé, porém, achou graça aos olhos do SENHOR.
Estas {são} as gerações de Noé: Noé era varão justo e reto em suas gerações; Noé andava com Deus.
E gerou Noé três filhos: Sem, Cam e Jafé.
A terra, porém, estava corrompida diante da face de Deus; e encheu-se a terra de violência.
E viu Deus a terra, e eis que estava corrompida; porque toda carne havia corrompido o seu caminho sobre a terra.
Então, disse Deus a Noé: O fim de toda carne é vindo perante a minha face; porque a terra está cheia de violência; e eis que os desfarei com a terra.
Faze para ti uma arca da madeira de gofer; farás compartimentos {ou divisões} na arca e a betumarás por dentro e por fora com betume.
E desta maneira farás: de trezentos côvados o comprimento da arca, e de cinqüenta côvados a sua largura, e de trinta côvados a sua altura.
Farás na arca uma janela e de um côvado a acabarás em cima; e a porta da arca porás ao seu lado; far-lhe-ás {andares} baixos, segundos e terceiros.
Porque eis que eu trago um dilúvio de águas sobre a terra, para desfazer toda carne em que {há} espírito de vida debaixo dos céus: tudo o que há na terra expirará.
Mas contigo estabelecerei o meu pacto; e entrarás na arca, tu e os teus filhos, e a tua mulher, e as mulheres de teus filhos contigo.
E de tudo o que vive, de toda carne, dois de cada espécie meterás na arca, para os conservares vivos contigo; macho e fêmea serão.
Das aves conforme a sua espécie, dos animais conforme a sua espécie, de todo réptil da terra conforme a sua espécie, dois de cada {espécie} virão a ti, para os conservares em vida.
E tu toma para ti de toda comida que se come e ajunta-a para ti; e te será para mantimento, para ti e para eles.
Assim fez Noé; conforme tudo o que Deus lhe mandou, assim o fez.
Depois, disse o SENHOR a Noé: Entra tu e toda a tua casa na arca, porque te hei visto justo diante de mim nesta geração.
De todo animal limpo tomarás para ti sete {e} sete: o macho e sua fêmea; mas dos animais que não são limpos, dois: o macho e sua fêmea.
Também das aves dos céus sete {e} sete: macho e fêmea, para se conservar em vida a semente sobre a face de toda a terra.
Porque, passados ainda sete dias, farei chover sobre a terra quarenta dias e quarenta noites; e desfarei de sobre a face da terra toda substância que fiz.
E fez Noé conforme tudo o que o SENHOR lhe ordenara.
E {era} Noé da idade de seiscentos anos, quando o dilúvio das águas veio sobre a terra.
E entrou Noé, e seus filhos, e sua mulher, e as mulheres de seus filhos com ele na arca, por causa das águas do dilúvio.
Dos animais limpos, e dos animais que não {são} limpos, e das aves, e de todo o réptil sobre a terra,
entraram de dois em dois para Noé na arca, macho e fêmea, como Deus ordenara a Noé.
E aconteceu que, passados sete dias, vieram sobre a terra as águas do dilúvio.
No ano seiscentos da vida de Noé, no mês segundo, aos dezessete dias do mês, naquele mesmo dia, se romperam todas as fontes do grande abismo, e as janelas dos céus se abriram,
e houve chuva sobre a terra quarenta dias e quarenta noites.
E, no mesmo dia, entrou Noé, e Sem, e Cam, e Jafé, os filhos de Noé, como também a mulher de Noé, e as três mulheres de seus filhos, com ele na arca;
eles, e todo animal conforme a sua espécie, e todo gado conforme a sua espécie, e todo réptil que se roja sobre a terra conforme a sua espécie, e toda ave conforme a sua espécie, todo pássaro de toda {ou toda sorte de asas} qualidade.
E de toda carne, em que havia espírito de vida, entraram de dois em dois para Noé na arca.
E os que entraram, macho e fêmea de toda carne entraram, como Deus lhe tinha ordenado; e o SENHOR a fechou por fora.
E esteve o dilúvio quarenta dias sobre a terra; e cresceram as águas e levantaram a arca, e ela se elevou sobre a terra.
E prevaleceram as águas e cresceram grandemente sobre a terra; e a arca andava sobre as águas.
E as águas prevaleceram excessivamente sobre a terra; e todos os altos montes que {havia} debaixo de todo o céu foram cobertos.
Quinze côvados acima prevaleceram as águas; e os montes foram cobertos.
E expirou toda carne que se movia sobre a terra, tanto de ave como de gado, e de feras, e de todo o réptil que se roja sobre a terra, e de todo homem.
Tudo o que {tinha} fôlego de espírito de vida em seus narizes, tudo o que {havia} no seco, morreu.
Assim, foi desfeita toda substância que {havia} sobre a face da terra, desde o homem até ao animal, até ao réptil e até à ave dos céus; e foram extintos da terra; e ficou somente Noé e os que com ele {estavam} na arca.
E prevaleceram as águas sobre a terra cento e cinqüenta dias.
E lembrou-se Deus de Noé, e de todo animal, e de toda rês que com ele {estava} na arca; e Deus fez passar um vento sobre a terra, e aquietaram-se as águas.
Cerraram-se também as fontes do abismo e as janelas dos céus, e a chuva dos céus deteve-se.
E as águas tornaram de sobre a terra continuamente {Heb. indo e tornando} e, ao cabo de cento e cinqüenta dias, as águas minguaram.
E a arca repousou, no sétimo mês, no dia dezessete do mês, sobre os montes de Ararate.
E foram as águas indo e minguando até ao décimo mês; no décimo mês, no primeiro dia do mês, apareceram os cumes dos montes.
E aconteceu que, ao cabo de quarenta dias, abriu Noé a janela da arca que tinha feito.
E soltou um corvo, que saiu, indo e voltando, até que as águas se secaram de sobre a terra.
Depois, soltou uma pomba, a ver se as águas tinham minguado de sobre a face da terra.
A pomba, porém, não achou repouso para a planta de seu pé e voltou a ele para a arca; porque as águas {estavam} sobre a face de toda a terra; e ele estendeu a sua mão, e tomou-a, e meteu-a consigo na arca.
E esperou ainda outros sete dias e tornou a enviar a pomba fora da arca.
E a pomba voltou a ele sobre a tarde; e eis, arrancada, uma folha de oliveira no seu bico; e conheceu Noé que as águas tinham minguado sobre a terra.
Então, esperou ainda outros sete dias e enviou fora a pomba; mas não tornou mais a ele.
E aconteceu {que,} no ano seiscentos e um, no {mês} primeiro, no primeiro {dia} do mês, as águas se secaram de sobre a terra. Então, Noé tirou a cobertura da arca e olhou, e eis que a face da terra estava enxuta.
E, no segundo mês, aos vinte e sete dias do mês, a terra estava seca.
Então, falou Deus a Noé, dizendo:
Sai da arca tu, e tua mulher, e teus filhos, e as mulheres de teus filhos contigo.
Todo animal que {está} contigo, de toda carne, de ave, e de gado, e de todo réptil que se roja sobre a terra, traze fora contigo; e povoem abundantemente a terra, e frutifiquem, e se multipliquem sobre a terra.
Então, saiu Noé, e seus filhos, e sua mulher, e as mulheres de seus filhos com ele;
todo animal, todo réptil, toda ave, tudo o que se move sobre a terra, conforme as suas famílias, saiu para fora da arca.
E edificou Noé um altar ao SENHOR; e tomou de todo animal limpo e de toda ave limpa e ofereceu holocaustos sobre o altar.
E o SENHOR cheirou o suave cheiro e disse o SENHOR em seu coração: Não tornarei mais a amaldiçoar a terra por causa do homem, porque a imaginação do coração do homem {é} má desde a sua meninice; nem tornarei mais a ferir todo vivente, como fiz.
Enquanto a terra durar, sementeira e sega, e frio e calor, e verão e inverno, e dia e noite não cessarão.
E abençoou Deus a Noé e a seus filhos e disse-lhes: frutificai, e multiplicai-vos, e enchei a terra.
E será o vosso temor e o vosso pavor sobre todo animal da terra e sobre toda ave dos céus; tudo o que se move sobre a terra e todos os peixes do mar na vossa mão são entregues.
Tudo quanto se move, que é vivente, será para vosso mantimento; tudo vos tenho dado, como a erva verde.
A carne, porém, com sua vida, isto é, com seu sangue, não comereis.
E certamente requererei o vosso sangue, {o sangue} da vossa vida; {ou alma} da mão de todo animal o requererei, como também da mão do homem e da mão do irmão de cada um requererei a vida do homem.
Quem derramar o sangue do homem, pelo homem o seu sangue será derramado; porque Deus fez o homem conforme a {sua} imagem.
Mas vós, frutificai e multiplicai-vos; povoai abundantemente a terra e multiplicai-vos nela.
E falou Deus a Noé e a seus filhos com ele, dizendo:
E eu, eis que estabeleço o meu concerto convosco, e com a vossa semente depois de vós,
e com toda alma {ou criatura} vivente, que convosco está, de aves, de reses, e de todo animal da terra convosco; desde todos que saíram da arca, até todo animal da terra.
E eu convosco estabeleço o meu concerto, que não será mais destruída toda carne pelas águas do dilúvio e que não haverá mais dilúvio para destruir a terra.
E disse Deus: Este {é} o sinal do concerto que ponho entre mim e vós e entre toda alma vivente, que está convosco, por gerações eternas.
O meu arco tenho posto na nuvem; este será por sinal do concerto entre mim e a terra.
E acontecerá que, quando eu trouxer nuvens sobre a terra, aparecerá o arco nas nuvens.
Então, me lembrarei do meu concerto, que está entre mim e vós e ainda toda alma vivente de toda carne; e as águas não se tornarão mais em dilúvio, para destruir toda carne.
E estará o arco nas nuvens, e eu o verei, para me lembrar do concerto eterno entre Deus e toda alma vivente de toda carne, que {está} sobre a terra.
E disse Deus a Noé: Este é o sinal do concerto que tenho estabelecido entre mim e toda a carne que {está} sobre a terra.
E os filhos de Noé, que da arca saíram, foram Sem, e Cam, e Jafé; e Cam {é} o pai de Canaã.
Estes três {foram} os filhos de Noé; e destes se povoou toda a terra.
E começou Noé a ser lavrador da terra e plantou uma vinha.
E bebeu do vinho e embebedou-se; e descobriu-se no meio de sua tenda.
E viu Cam, o pai de Canaã, a nudez de seu pai e fê-lo saber a ambos seus irmãos, fora.
Então, tomaram Sem e Jafé uma capa, puseram-na sobre ambos os seus ombros e, indo virados para trás, cobriram a nudez do seu pai; e os seus rostos eram virados, de maneira que não viram a nudez do seu pai.
E despertou Noé do seu vinho e soube o que seu filho menor lhe fizera.
E disse: Maldito seja Canaã; servo dos servos seja aos seus irmãos.
E disse: Bendito seja o SENHOR, Deus de Sem; e seja-lhe Canaã por servo.
Alargue Deus a Jafé, e habite nas tendas de Sem; e seja-lhe Canaã por servo.
E viveu Noé, depois do dilúvio, trezentos e cinqüenta anos.
E foram todos os dias de Noé novecentos e cinqüenta anos, e morreu.
Estas, pois, são as gerações dos filhos de Noé: Sem, Cam e Jafé; e nasceram-lhes filhos depois do dilúvio.
Os filhos de Jafé {são:} Gomer, e Magogue, e Madai, e Javã, e Tubal, e Meseque, e Tiras.
E os filhos de Gomer {são:} Asquenaz, e Rifate, e Togarma.
E os filhos de Javã {são:} Elisá, e Társis, e Quitim, e Dodanim.
Por estes, foram repartidas as ilhas das nações nas suas terras, cada qual segundo a sua língua, segundo as suas famílias, entre as suas nações.
E os filhos de Cam {são:} Cuxe, e Mizraim, e Pute, e Canaã.
E os filhos de Cuxe {são:} Sebá, e Havilá, e Sabtá, e Raamá, e Sabtecá; e os filhos de Raamá são: Sabá e Dedã.
E Cuxe gerou a Ninrode; este começou a ser poderoso na terra.
E este foi poderoso caçador diante da face do SENHOR; pelo que se diz: Como Ninrode, poderoso caçador diante do SENHOR.
E o princípio do seu reino foi Babel, e Ereque, e Acade, e Calné, na terra de Sinar.
Desta mesma terra saiu ele à Assíria e edificou a Nínive, e Reobote-Ir, e Calá,
e Resém, entre Nínive e Calá (esta é a grande cidade).
E Mizraim gerou a Ludim, e a Anamim, e a Leabim, e a Naftuim,
e a Patrusim, e a Casluim (donde saíram os filisteus), e a Caftorim.
E Canaã gerou a Sidom, seu primogênito, e a Hete,
e ao jebuseu, e ao amorreu, e ao girgaseu,
e ao heveu, e ao arqueu, e ao sineu,
e ao arvadeu, e ao zemareu, e ao hamateu, e depois se espalharam as famílias dos cananeus.
E foi o termo dos cananeus desde Sidom, indo para Gerar, até Gaza; indo para Sodoma, e Gomorra, e Admá, e Zeboim, até Lasa.
Estes são os filhos de Cam, segundo as suas famílias, segundo as suas línguas, em suas terras, em suas nações.
E a Sem nasceram {filhos,} e ele {é} o pai de todos os filhos de Éber e o irmão mais velho de Jafé.
Os filhos de Sem {são:} Elão, e Assur, e Arfaxade, e Lude, e Arã.
E os filhos de Arã {são:} Uz, e Hul, e Geter, e Más.
E Arfaxade gerou a Salá; e Salá gerou a Éber.
E a Éber nasceram dois filhos: o nome de um {foi} Pelegue, {que significa divisão} porquanto em seus dias se repartiu a terra; e o nome do seu irmão foi Joctã.
E Joctã gerou a Almodá, e a Selefe, e a Hazar-Mavé, e a Jerá,
e a Hadorão, e a Uzal, e a Dicla,
e a Obal, e a Abimael, e a Sabá,
e a Ofir, e a Havilá, e a Jobabe; todos estes foram filhos de Joctã.
E foi a sua habitação desde Messa, indo para Sefar, montanha do Oriente.
Estes {são} os filhos de Sem, segundo as suas famílias, segundo as suas línguas, em suas terras, em suas nações.
Estas são as famílias dos filhos de Noé, segundo as suas gerações, em suas nações; e destes foram divididas as nações na terra, depois do dilúvio.
E era toda a terra de uma mesma língua e de uma mesma fala.
E aconteceu que, partindo eles do Oriente, acharam um vale na terra de Sinar; e habitaram ali.
E disseram uns aos outros: Eia, façamos tijolos e queimemo-los bem. E foi-lhes o tijolo por pedra, e o betume, por cal.
E disseram: Eia, edifiquemos nós uma cidade e uma torre cujo cume toque nos céus e façamo-nos um nome, para que não sejamos espalhados sobre a face de toda a terra.
Então, desceu o SENHOR para ver a cidade e a torre que os filhos dos homens edificavam;
e o SENHOR disse: Eis que o povo é um, e todos têm uma mesma língua; e isto é o que começam a fazer; e, agora, não haverá restrição para tudo o que eles intentarem fazer.
Eia, desçamos e confundamos ali a sua língua, para que não entenda um a língua do outro.
Assim, o SENHOR os espalhou dali sobre a face de toda a terra; e cessaram de edificar a cidade.
Por isso, se chamou o seu nome Babel, {que significa confusão} porquanto ali confundiu o SENHOR a língua de toda a terra e dali os espalhou o SENHOR sobre a face de toda a terra.
Estas são as gerações de Sem: Sem era da idade de cem anos e gerou a Arfaxade, dois anos depois do dilúvio.
E viveu Sem, depois que gerou a Arfaxade, quinhentos anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Arfaxade trinta e cinco anos e gerou a Salá.
E viveu Arfaxade, depois que gerou a Salá, quatrocentos e três anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Salá trinta anos e gerou a Éber.
E viveu Salá, depois que gerou a Éber, quatrocentos e três anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Éber trinta e quatro anos e gerou a Pelegue.
E viveu Éber, depois que gerou a Pelegue, quatrocentos e trinta anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Pelegue trinta anos e gerou a Reú.
E viveu Pelegue, depois que gerou a Reú, duzentos e nove anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Reú trinta e dois anos e gerou a Serugue.
E viveu Reú, depois que gerou a Serugue, duzentos e sete anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Serugue trinta anos e gerou a Naor.
E viveu Serugue, depois que gerou a Naor, duzentos anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Naor vinte e nove anos e gerou a Tera.
E viveu Naor, depois que gerou a Tera, cento e dezenove anos; e gerou filhos e filhas.
E viveu Tera setenta anos e gerou a Abrão, a Naor e a Harã.
E estas são as gerações de Tera: Tera gerou a Abrão, a Naor e a Harã; e Harã gerou a Ló.
E morreu Harã, estando seu pai Tera ainda vivo, na terra do seu nascimento, em Ur dos caldeus.
E tomaram Abrão e Naor mulheres para si; o nome da mulher de Abrão era Sarai, e o nome da mulher de Naor era Milca, filha de Harã, pai de Milca e pai de Iscá.
E Sarai foi estéril e não tinha filhos.
E tomou Tera a Abrão, seu filho, e a Ló, filho de Harã, filho de seu filho, e a Sarai, sua nora, mulher de seu filho Abrão, e saiu com eles de Ur dos caldeus, para ir à terra de Canaã; e vieram até Harã e habitaram ali.
E foram os dias de Tera duzentos e cinco anos; e morreu Tera em Harã.
Ora, o SENHOR disse a Abrão: Sai-te da tua terra, e da tua parentela, e da casa de teu pai, para a terra que eu te mostrarei.
E far-te-ei uma grande nação, e abençoar-te-ei, e engrandecerei o teu nome, e {tu} serás uma bênção.
E abençoarei os que te abençoarem e amaldiçoarei os que te amaldiçoarem; e em ti serão benditas todas as famílias da terra.
Assim, partiu Abrão, como o SENHOR lhe tinha dito, e foi Ló com ele; e era Abrão da idade de setenta e cinco anos, quando saiu de Harã.
E tomou Abrão a Sarai, sua mulher, e a Ló, filho de seu irmão, e toda a sua fazenda, que haviam adquirido, e as almas que lhe acresceram em Harã; e saíram para irem à terra de Canaã; e vieram à terra de Canaã.
E passou Abrão por aquela terra até ao lugar de Siquém, até ao carvalho de Moré; e {estavam,} então, os cananeus na terra.
E apareceu o SENHOR a Abrão e disse: À tua semente darei esta terra. E edificou ali um altar ao SENHOR, que lhe aparecera.
E moveu-se dali para a montanha à banda do oriente de Betel e armou a sua tenda, {tendo} Betel ao ocidente e Ai ao oriente; e edificou ali um altar ao SENHOR e invocou o nome do SENHOR.
Depois, caminhou Abrão {dali,} seguindo ainda para a banda do Sul.
E havia fome naquela terra; e desceu Abrão ao Egito, para peregrinar ali, porquanto a fome era grande na terra.
E aconteceu que, chegando ele para entrar no Egito, disse a Sarai, sua mulher: Ora, bem sei que és mulher formosa à vista;
e será que, quando os egípcios te virem, dirão: Esta é a sua mulher. E matar-me-ão a mim e a ti te guardarão em vida.
Dize, peço-te, {que} és minha irmã, para que me vá bem por tua causa, e que viva a minha alma por amor de ti.
E aconteceu que, entrando Abrão no Egito, viram os egípcios a mulher, que era mui formosa.
E viram-na os príncipes de Faraó e gabaram-na diante de Faraó; e foi a mulher tomada para a casa de Faraó.
E fez bem a Abrão por amor dela; e ele teve ovelhas, e vacas, e jumentos, e servos, e servas, e jumentas, e camelos.
Feriu, porém, o SENHOR a Faraó com grandes pragas e a sua casa, por causa de Sarai, mulher de Abrão.
Então, chamou Faraó a Abrão e disse: Que é isto {que} me fizeste? Por que não me disseste que ela {era} tua mulher?
Por que disseste: É minha irmã? De maneira que a houvera tomado por minha mulher; agora, pois, eis aqui tua mulher; toma-{a} e vai-te.
E Faraó deu ordens aos seus varões a seu respeito, e acompanharam-no a ele, e a sua mulher, e a tudo o que tinha.
Subiu, pois, Abrão do Egito para a banda do Sul, ele, e sua mulher, e tudo o que tinha, e com ele Ló.
E {ia} Abrão muito rico em gado, em prata e em ouro.
E fez as suas jornadas do Sul até Betel, até ao lugar onde, ao princípio, estivera a sua tenda, entre Betel e Ai;
até ao lugar do altar que, dantes, ali tinha feito; e Abrão invocou ali o nome do SENHOR.
E também Ló, que ia com Abrão, tinha rebanhos, e vacas, e tendas.
E não tinha capacidade a terra para {poderem} habitar juntos, porque a sua fazenda era muita; de maneira que não podiam habitar juntos.
E houve contenda entre os pastores do gado de Abrão e os pastores do gado de Ló; e os cananeus e os ferezeus habitavam, então, na terra.
E disse Abrão a Ló: Ora, não haja contenda entre mim e ti e entre os meus pastores e os teus pastores, porque irmãos somos.
Não está toda a terra diante de ti? Eia, pois, aparta-te de mim; se {escolheres} a esquerda, irei para a direita; e, se a direita {escolheres,} eu irei para a esquerda.
E levantou Ló os seus olhos e viu toda a campina do Jordão, que {era} toda bem regada, antes de o SENHOR ter destruído Sodoma e Gomorra, e {era} como o jardim do SENHOR, como a terra do Egito, quando se entra em Zoar.
Então, Ló escolheu para si toda a campina do Jordão e partiu Ló para o Oriente; e apartaram-se um do outro.
Habitou Abrão na terra de Canaã, e Ló habitou nas cidades da campina e armou as suas tendas até Sodoma.
Ora, {eram} maus os varões de Sodoma e grandes pecadores contra o SENHOR.
E disse o SENHOR a Abrão, depois que Ló se apartou dele: Levanta, agora, os teus olhos e olha desde o lugar onde estás, para a banda do norte, e do sul, e do oriente, e do ocidente;
porque toda esta terra que vês te hei de dar a ti e à tua semente, para sempre.
E farei a tua semente como o pó da terra; de maneira que, se alguém puder contar o pó da terra, também a tua semente será contada.
Levanta-te, percorre essa terra, no seu comprimento e na sua largura; porque a ti a darei.
E Abrão armou as suas tendas, e veio, e habitou nos carvalhais de Manre, que estão junto a Hebrom; e edificou ali um altar ao SENHOR.
E aconteceu, nos dias de Anrafel, rei de Sinar, Arioque, rei de Elasar, Quedorlaomer, rei de Elão, e Tidal, rei de Goim, {que significa nações}
que {estes} fizeram guerra a Bera, rei de Sodoma, a Birsa, rei de Gomorra, a Sinabe, rei de Admá, e a Semeber, rei de Zeboim, e ao rei de Bela (esta é Zoar).
Todos estes se ajuntaram no vale de Sidim (que é o mar de Sal).
Doze anos haviam servido a Quedorlaomer, mas, ao décimo terceiro ano, rebelaram-se.
E, ao décimo quarto ano, veio Quedorlaomer e os reis que estavam com ele e feriram aos refains em Asterote-Carnaim, e aos zuzins em Hã, e aos emins em Savé-Quiriataim,
e aos horeus no seu monte Seir, até à campina de Parã, que {está} junto ao deserto.
Depois, tornaram, e vieram a En-Mispate (que é Cades), e feriram toda a terra dos amalequitas e também os amorreus, que habitavam em Hazazom-Tamar.
Então, saiu o rei de Sodoma, e o rei de Gomorra, e o rei de Admá, e o rei de Zeboim, e o rei de Bela (esta é Zoar) e ordenaram batalha contra eles no vale de Sidim,
contra Quedorlaomer, rei de Elão, e Tidal, rei de Goim, e Anrafel, rei de Sinar, e Arioque, rei de Elasar; quatro reis contra cinco.
E o vale de Sidim estava cheio de poços de betume; e fugiram os reis de Sodoma e de Gomorra e caíram ali; e os restantes fugiram para um monte.
E tomaram toda a fazenda de Sodoma e de Gomorra e todo o seu mantimento e foram-se.
Também tomaram a Ló, que habitava em Sodoma, filho do irmão de Abrão, e a sua fazenda e foram-se.
Então, veio um que escapara e o contou a Abrão, o hebreu; ele habitava junto dos carvalhais de Manre, o amorreu, irmão de Escol e irmão de Aner; eles eram confederados de Abrão.
Ouvindo, pois, Abrão que o seu irmão estava preso, armou os seus criados, nascidos em sua casa, trezentos e dezoito, e os perseguiu até Dã.
E dividiu-se contra eles de noite, ele e os seus criados, e os feriu, e os perseguiu até Hobá, que {fica} à esquerda de Damasco.
E tornou a trazer toda a fazenda e tornou a trazer também a Ló, seu irmão, e a sua fazenda, e também as mulheres, e o povo.
E o rei de Sodoma saiu-lhes ao encontro (depois que voltou de ferir a Quedorlaomer e aos reis que {estavam} com ele) no vale de Savé, que {é} o vale do Rei.
E Melquisedeque, rei de Salém, trouxe pão e vinho; e este {era} sacerdote do Deus Altíssimo.
E abençoou-o e disse: Bendito {seja} Abrão do Deus Altíssimo, o Possuidor dos céus e da terra;
e bendito {seja} o Deus Altíssimo, que entregou os teus inimigos nas tuas mãos. E deu-lhe o dízimo de tudo.
E o rei de Sodoma disse a Abrão: Dá-me a mim as almas e a fazenda toma para ti.
Abrão, porém, disse ao rei de Sodoma: Levantei minha mão ao SENHOR, o Deus Altíssimo, o Possuidor dos céus e da terra,
e juro que, desde um fio até à correia dum sapato, não {tomarei} coisa alguma de tudo o que {é} teu; para que não digas: Eu enriqueci a Abrão;
salvo tão-somente o que os jovens comeram e a parte {que toca} aos varões que comigo foram, Aner, Escol e Manre; estes que tomem a sua parte.
Depois destas coisas veio a palavra do SENHOR a Abrão em visão, dizendo: Não temas, Abrão, eu sou o teu escudo, o teu grandíssimo galardão.
Então, disse Abrão: Senhor JEOVÁ, que me hás de dar? Pois ando sem filhos, e o mordomo da minha casa é o damasceno Eliézer.
Disse mais Abrão: Eis que me não tens dado semente, e eis que um nascido na minha casa será o meu herdeiro.
E eis que {veio} a palavra do SENHOR a ele, dizendo: Este não será o teu herdeiro; mas aquele que de ti será gerado, esse será o teu herdeiro.
Então, o levou fora e disse: Olha, agora, para os céus e conta as estrelas, se as podes contar. E disse-lhe: Assim será a tua semente.
E creu ele no SENHOR, e foi-lhe {ou contou-lhe} imputado isto {por} justiça.
Disse-lhe mais: Eu {sou} o SENHOR, que te tirei de Ur dos caldeus, para dar-te a ti esta terra, para a herdares.
E disse ele: Senhor JEOVÁ, como saberei que hei de herdá-la?
E disse-lhe: Toma-me uma bezerra de três anos, e uma cabra de três anos, e um carneiro de três anos, e uma rola, e um pombinho.
E trouxe-lhe todos estes, e partiu-os pelo meio, e pôs cada parte deles em frente da outra; mas as aves não partiu.
E as aves desciam sobre os cadáveres; Abrão, porém, as enxotava.
E, pondo-se o sol, um profundo sono caiu sobre Abrão; e eis que grande espanto e grande escuridão caíram sobre ele.
Então, disse a Abrão: Saibas, decerto, que peregrina será a tua semente em terra {que} não {é} sua; e servi-los-á e afligi-la-ão quatrocentos anos.
Mas também eu julgarei a gente à qual servirão, e depois sairão com grande fazenda.
E tu irás a teus pais em paz; em boa velhice serás sepultado.
E a quarta geração tornará para cá; porque a medida da injustiça dos amorreus não {está} ainda cheia.
E sucedeu que, posto o sol, houve escuridão; e eis um forno de fumaça e uma tocha de fogo que passou por aquelas metades.
Naquele mesmo dia, fez o SENHOR um concerto com Abrão, dizendo: À tua semente tenho dado esta terra, desde o rio do Egito até ao grande rio Eufrates,
e o queneu, e o quenezeu, e o cadmoneu,
e o heteu, e o ferezeu, e os refains,
e o amorreu, e o cananeu, e o girgaseu, e o jebuseu.
Ora, Sarai, mulher de Abrão, não lhe gerava filhos, e ele tinha uma serva egípcia, cujo nome {era} Agar.
E disse Sarai a Abrão: Eis que o SENHOR me tem impedido de gerar; entra, pois, à minha serva; porventura, terei {ou serei dela edificada} filhos dela. E ouviu Abrão a voz de Sarai.
Assim, tomou Sarai, mulher de Abrão, a Agar, egípcia, sua serva, e deu-a por mulher a Abrão, seu marido, ao fim de dez anos que Abrão habitara na terra de Canaã.
E ele entrou a Agar, e ela concebeu; e, vendo ela que concebera, foi sua senhora desprezada aos seus olhos.
Então, disse Sarai a Abrão: Meu agravo {seja} sobre ti. Minha serva pus eu em teu regaço; vendo ela, agora, que concebeu, sou menosprezada aos seus olhos. O SENHOR julgue entre mim e ti.
E disse Abrão a Sarai: Eis que tua serva {está} na tua mão; faze-lhe o que bom {é} aos teus olhos. E afligiu-a Sarai, e ela fugiu de sua face.
E o Anjo do SENHOR a achou junto a uma fonte de água no deserto, junto à fonte no caminho de Sur.
E disse: Agar, serva de Sarai, de onde vens e para onde vais? E {ela} disse: Venho fugida da face de Sarai, minha senhora.
Então, lhe disse o Anjo do SENHOR: Torna-te para tua senhora e humilha-te debaixo de suas mãos.
Disse-lhe mais o Anjo do SENHOR: Multiplicarei sobremaneira a tua semente, que não será contada, por numerosa {que} será.
Disse-lhe também o Anjo do SENHOR: Eis que concebeste, e terás um filho, e chamarás o seu nome Ismael, {que significa Deus (está) ouvindo} porquanto o SENHOR ouviu a tua aflição.
E ele será homem {Heb. como um jumento bravo} bravo; e a sua mão {será} contra todos, e a mão de todos, contra ele; e habitará diante da face de todos os seus irmãos.
E {ela} chamou o nome do SENHOR, que com ela falava: Tu {ou Tu és um Deus que me vês} és Deus da vista, porque disse: Não olhei eu também para aquele que me vê?
Por isso, se chama aquele poço de Laai-Roi; {que significa aquele que vive e me vê} eis que {está} entre Cades e Berede.
E Agar deu um filho a Abrão; e Abrão chamou o nome do seu filho que tivera Agar, Ismael.
E {era} Abrão da idade de oitenta e seis anos, quando Agar deu Ismael a Abrão.
Sendo, pois, Abrão da idade de noventa e nove anos, apareceu o SENHOR a Abrão e disse-lhe: Eu {sou} o Deus Todo-poderoso; anda em minha presença e sê perfeito.
E porei o meu concerto entre mim e ti e te multiplicarei grandissimamente.
Então, caiu Abrão sobre o seu rosto, e falou Deus com ele, dizendo:
Quanto a mim, eis o meu concerto contigo é, e serás o pai de uma multidão de nações.
E não se chamará mais o teu nome Abrão, {que significa pai da altura} mas Abraão {que significa pai de uma multidão} será o teu nome; porque por pai da multidão de nações te tenho posto.
E te farei frutificar grandissimamente e de ti farei nações, e reis sairão de ti.
E estabelecerei o meu concerto entre mim e ti e a tua semente depois de ti em suas gerações, por concerto perpétuo, para te ser a ti por Deus e à tua semente depois de ti.
E te darei a ti e à tua semente depois de ti a terra de tuas peregrinações, toda a terra de Canaã em perpétua possessão, e ser-lhes-ei o seu Deus.
Disse mais Deus a Abraão: Tu, porém, guardarás o meu concerto, tu e a tua semente depois de ti, nas suas gerações.
Este {é} o meu concerto, que guardareis entre mim e vós e a tua semente depois de ti: {Que} todo macho será circuncidado.
E circuncidareis a carne do vosso prepúcio; e {isto} será por sinal do concerto entre mim e vós.
O filho de oito dias, pois, será circuncidado; todo macho nas vossas gerações, o nascido na casa e o comprado por dinheiro a qualquer estrangeiro, que não {for} da tua semente.
Com efeito, será circuncidado o nascido em tua casa e o comprado por teu dinheiro; e estará o meu concerto na vossa carne por concerto perpétuo.
E o macho com prepúcio, cuja carne do prepúcio não estiver circuncidada, aquela alma será extirpada dos seus povos; quebrantou o meu concerto.
Disse Deus mais a Abraão: a Sarai, tua mulher, não chamarás {mais} pelo nome de Sarai, mas Sara {que significa princesa} {será} o seu nome.
Porque eu a hei de abençoar e te hei de dar a ti dela um filho; e a abençoarei, e será {mãe} das nações; reis de povos sairão dela.
Então, caiu Abraão sobre o seu rosto, e riu-se, e disse no seu coração: A um homem de cem anos há de nascer {um filho?} E conceberá Sara na idade de noventa anos?
E disse Abraão a Deus: Tomara que viva Ismael diante de teu rosto!
E disse Deus: Na verdade, Sara, tua mulher, te dará um filho, e chamarás o seu nome Isaque; {que significa riso} e com ele estabelecerei o meu concerto, por concerto perpétuo para a sua semente depois dele.
E, quanto a Ismael, {também} te tenho ouvido: eis aqui o tenho abençoado, e fá-lo-ei frutificar, e fá-lo-ei multiplicar grandissimamente; doze príncipes gerará, e dele farei uma grande nação.
O meu concerto, porém, estabelecerei com Isaque, o qual Sara te dará neste tempo determinado, no ano seguinte.
E acabou de falar com ele e subiu Deus de Abraão.
Então, tomou Abraão a seu filho Ismael, e a todos os nascidos na sua casa, e a todos os comprados por seu dinheiro, todo macho entre os homens da casa de Abraão; e circuncidou a carne do seu prepúcio, naquele mesmo dia, como Deus falara com ele.
E {era} Abraão da idade de noventa e nove anos, quando lhe foi circuncidada a carne do seu prepúcio.
E Ismael, seu filho, {era} da idade de treze anos, quando lhe foi circuncidada a carne do seu prepúcio.
Neste mesmo dia, foi circuncidado Abraão e Ismael, seu filho.
E todos os homens da sua casa, o nascido em casa e o comprado por dinheiro do estrangeiro, foram circuncidados com ele.
Depois, apareceu-lhe o SENHOR nos carvalhais de Manre, estando ele assentado à porta da tenda, quando {ou no maior calor do dia} tinha aquecido o dia.
E levantou os olhos e olhou, e eis três varões estavam em pé junto a ele. E, vendo-{os,} correu da porta da tenda ao seu encontro, e inclinou-se à terra,
e disse: Meu Senhor, se agora tenho achado graça aos teus olhos, rogo-te que não passes de teu servo.
Traga-se, agora, um pouco de água; e lavai os vossos pés e recostai-vos debaixo desta árvore;
e trarei um bocado de pão, para que esforceis o vosso coração; depois, passareis adiante, porquanto por isso chegastes até vosso servo. E disseram: Assim, faze como tens dito.
E Abraão apressou-se em ir ter com Sara à tenda e disse-lhe: Amassa depressa três medidas de flor de farinha e faze bolos.
E correu Abraão às vacas, e tomou uma vitela tenra e boa, e deu-{a} ao moço, que se apressou em prepará-la.
E tomou manteiga e leite e a vitela que tinha preparado e pôs {tudo} diante deles; e ele estava em pé junto a eles debaixo da árvore; e comeram.
E disseram-lhe: Onde {está} Sara, tua mulher? E ele disse: Ei-la, {aí está} na tenda.
E disse: Certamente tornarei a ti por {este} tempo da vida; e eis que Sara, tua mulher, terá um filho. E ouviu-{o} Sara à porta da tenda, que {estava} atrás dele.
E {eram} Abraão e Sara já velhos {e} adiantados em idade; já a Sara havia cessado o costume das mulheres.
Assim, pois, riu-se Sara consigo, dizendo: Terei {ainda} deleite depois de haver envelhecido, sendo também o meu senhor já velho?
E disse o SENHOR a Abraão: Por que se riu Sara, dizendo: Na verdade, gerarei eu ainda, havendo já envelhecido?
Haveria coisa alguma difícil ao SENHOR? Ao tempo determinado, tornarei a ti por {este} tempo da vida, e Sara terá um filho.
E Sara negou, dizendo: Não me ri, porquanto temeu. E {ele} disse: Não {digas isso,} porque te riste.
E levantaram-se aqueles varões dali e olharam para a banda de Sodoma; e Abraão ia com eles, acompanhando-os.
E disse o SENHOR: Ocultarei eu a Abraão o que faço,
visto que Abraão certamente virá a ser uma grande e poderosa nação, e nele serão benditas todas as nações da terra?
Porque eu o tenho conhecido, que ele há de ordenar a seus filhos e a sua casa depois dele, para que guardem o caminho do SENHOR, para agirem {com} justiça e juízo; para que o SENHOR faça vir sobre Abraão o que acerca dele tem falado.
Disse mais o SENHOR: Porquanto o clamor de Sodoma e Gomorra se tem multiplicado, e porquanto o seu pecado se tem agravado muito,
descerei agora e verei se, com efeito, têm praticado segundo este clamor que é vindo até mim; e, se não, sabê-lo-ei.
Então, viraram aqueles varões o rosto dali e foram-se para Sodoma; mas Abraão ficou ainda em pé diante da face do SENHOR.
E chegou-se Abraão, dizendo: Destruirás também o justo com o ímpio?
Se, porventura, houver cinqüenta justos na cidade, destruí-los-ás também e não pouparás o lugar por causa dos cinqüenta justos que {estão} dentro dela?
Longe de ti que faças tal coisa, que mates o justo com o ímpio; que o justo seja como o ímpio, longe de ti {seja.} Não faria justiça o Juiz de toda a terra?
Então, disse o SENHOR: Se eu em Sodoma achar cinqüenta justos dentro da cidade, pouparei todo o lugar por amor deles.
E respondeu Abraão, dizendo: Eis que, agora, me atrevi a falar ao Senhor, ainda que {sou} pó e cinza.
Se, porventura, faltarem de cinqüenta justos cinco, destruirás por aqueles cinco toda a cidade? E disse: Não {a} destruirei, se eu achar ali quarenta e cinco.
E continuou ainda a falar-lhe e disse: Se, porventura, acharem ali quarenta? E disse: Não {o} farei, por amor dos quarenta.
Disse mais: Ora, não se ire o Senhor, se eu {ainda} falar: se, porventura, se acharem ali trinta? E disse: Não {o} farei se achar ali trinta.
E disse: Eis que, agora, me atrevi a falar ao Senhor: se, porventura, se acharem ali vinte? E disse: Não {a} destruirei, por amor dos vinte.
Disse mais: Ora, não se ire o Senhor que {ainda} só mais esta vez falo: se, porventura, se acharem ali dez? E disse: Não {a} destruirei, por amor dos dez.
E foi-se o SENHOR, quando acabou de falar a Abraão; e Abraão tornou ao seu lugar.
E vieram os dois anjos a Sodoma à tarde, e estava Ló assentado à porta de Sodoma; e, vendo-{os} Ló, levantou-se ao seu encontro e inclinou-se com o rosto à terra.
E disse: Eis agora, meus senhores, entrai, peço-vos, em casa de vosso servo, e passai {nela} a noite, e lavai os vossos pés; e de madrugada vos levantareis e ireis vosso caminho. E eles disseram: Não! Antes, na rua passaremos a noite.
E porfiou com eles muito, e vieram com ele e entraram em sua casa; e fez-lhes banquete e cozeu bolos sem levedura, e comeram.
E, antes que se deitassem, cercaram a casa os varões daquela cidade, os varões de Sodoma, desde o moço até ao velho; todo o povo de todos os bairros.
E chamaram Ló e disseram-lhe: Onde {estão} os varões que a ti vieram nesta noite? Traze-os fora a nós, para que os conheçamos.
Então, saiu Ló a eles à porta, e fechou a porta atrás de si,
e disse: Meus irmãos, rogo-vos que não façais mal.
Eis aqui, duas filhas tenho, que {ainda} não conheceram varão; fora vo-las trarei, e fareis delas como bom {for} nos vossos olhos; somente nada façais a estes varões, porque por isso vieram à sombra do meu telhado.
Eles, porém, disseram: Sai daí. Disseram mais: Como estrangeiro, este indivíduo veio {aqui} habitar e quereria ser juiz em tudo? Agora, te faremos mais mal a ti do que a eles. E arremessaram-se sobre o varão, {sobre} Ló, e aproximaram-se para arrombar a porta.
Aqueles varões, porém, estenderam a sua mão, e fizeram entrar a Ló consigo na casa, e fecharam a porta;
e feriram de cegueira os varões que {estavam} à porta da casa, desde o menor até ao maior, de maneira que se cansaram para achar a porta.
Então, disseram aqueles varões a Ló: Tens alguém mais aqui? Teu genro, e teus filhos, e tuas filhas, e todos quantos tens nesta cidade, tira-os fora deste lugar;
pois nós vamos destruir este lugar, porque o seu clamor tem engrossado diante da face do SENHOR, e o SENHOR nos enviou a destruí-lo.
Então, saiu Ló, e falou a seus genros, aos que haviam de tomar as suas filhas, e disse: Levantai-vos; saí deste lugar, porque o SENHOR há de destruir a cidade. Foi tido, porém, por zombador aos olhos de seus genros.
E, ao amanhecer, os anjos apertaram com Ló, dizendo: Levanta-te, toma tua mulher e tuas duas filhas que aqui estão, para que não pereças na injustiça desta cidade.
Ele, porém, demorava-se, e aqueles varões lhe pegaram pela mão, e pela mão de sua mulher, e pela mão de suas duas filhas, sendo-lhe o Senhor misericordioso, e tiraram-no, e puseram-no fora da cidade.
E aconteceu que, tirando-os fora, disse: Escapa-te por tua vida; não olhes para trás de ti e não pares em toda esta campina; escapa lá para o monte, para que não pereças.
E Ló disse-lhe: Assim, não, Senhor!
Eis que, agora, o teu servo tem achado graça aos teus olhos, e engrandeceste a tua misericórdia que a mim me fizeste, para guardar a minha alma em vida; mas não posso escapar no monte, pois que tenho medo que me apanhe este mal, e eu morra.
Eis, agora, aquela cidade {está} perto, para fugir para lá, e {é} pequena; ora, {para} ali me escaparei (não {é} pequena?), para que minha alma viva.
E disse-lhe: Eis aqui, tenho-te aceitado também neste negócio, para não derribar esta cidade de que falaste.
Apressa-te, escapa-te para ali; porque nada poderei fazer, enquanto não tiveres ali chegado. Por isso, se chamou o nome da cidade Zoar. {que significa pequena}
Saiu o sol sobre a terra, quando Ló entrou em Zoar.
Então, o SENHOR fez chover enxofre e fogo, do SENHOR desde os céus, sobre Sodoma e Gomorra.
E derribou aquelas cidades, e toda aquela campina, e todos os moradores daquelas cidades, e o que nascia da terra.
E a mulher de Ló olhou para trás e ficou convertida numa estátua de sal.
E Abraão levantou-se aquela mesma manhã de madrugada e foi para aquele lugar onde estivera diante da face do SENHOR.
E olhou para Sodoma e Gomorra e para toda a terra da campina; e viu, e eis que a fumaça da terra subia, como a fumaça duma fornalha.
E aconteceu que, destruindo Deus as cidades da campina, Deus se lembrou de Abraão e tirou Ló do meio da destruição, derribando aquelas cidades em que Ló habitara.
E subiu Ló de Zoar e habitou no monte, e as suas duas filhas com ele, porque temia habitar em Zoar; e habitou numa caverna, ele e as suas duas filhas.
Então, a primogênita disse à menor: Nosso pai {é} já velho, e não {há} varão na terra que entre a nós, segundo o costume de toda a terra.
Vem, demos a beber vinho a nosso pai e deitemo-nos com ele, para que em vida conservemos semente de nosso pai.
E deram a beber vinho a seu pai naquela noite; e veio a primogênita e deitou-se com seu pai, e não sentiu ele quando ela se deitou, nem quando se levantou.
E sucedeu, no outro dia, que a primogênita disse à menor: Vês aqui, eu já ontem à noite me deitei com meu pai; demos-lhe a beber vinho também esta noite, e então entra tu, deita-te com ele, para que em vida conservemos semente de nosso pai.
E deram a beber vinho a seu pai, também naquela noite; e levantou-se a menor e deitou-se com ele; e não sentiu ele quando ela se deitou, nem quando se levantou.
E conceberam as duas filhas de Ló de seu pai.
E teve a primogênita um filho e chamou o seu nome Moabe; este {é} o pai dos moabitas, até ao dia de hoje.
E a menor também teve um filho e chamou o seu nome Ben-Ami; este {é} o pai dos filhos de Amom, até o dia de hoje.
E partiu Abraão dali para a terra do Sul e habitou entre Cades e Sur; e peregrinou em Gerar.
E, havendo Abraão dito de Sara, sua mulher: {É} minha irmã, enviou Abimeleque, rei de Gerar, e tomou a Sara.
Deus, porém, veio a Abimeleque em sonhos de noite e disse-lhe: Eis que morto {és} por causa da mulher que tomaste; porque ela {está} casada com marido.
Mas Abimeleque {ainda} não se tinha chegado a ela; por isso, disse: Senhor, matarás também uma nação justa?
Não me disse ele mesmo: É minha irmã? E ela também disse: É meu irmão. Em sinceridade do coração e em pureza das minhas mãos, tenho feito isto.
E disse-lhe Deus em sonhos: Bem sei eu que na sinceridade do teu coração fizeste isto; e também eu te tenho impedido de pecar contra mim; por isso, te não permiti tocá-la.
Agora, pois, restitui a mulher ao seu marido, porque profeta é e rogará por ti, para que vivas; porém, se não lha restituíres, sabe que certamente morrerás, tu e tudo o que é teu.
E levantou-se Abimeleque pela manhã, de madrugada, chamou todos os seus servos e falou todas estas palavras em seus ouvidos; e temeram muito aqueles varões.
Então, chamou Abimeleque a Abraão e disse-lhe: Que nos fizeste? E em que pequei contra ti, para trazeres sobre mim e meu reino tamanho pecado? Tu me fizeste aquilo que não deverias ter feito.
Disse mais Abimeleque a Abraão: Que tens visto, para fazeres tal coisa?
E disse Abraão: Porque eu dizia comigo: Certamente não {há} temor de Deus neste lugar, e eles me matarão por amor da minha mulher.
E, na verdade, é ela também minha irmã, filha de meu pai, mas não filha da minha mãe; e veio a ser minha mulher.
E aconteceu que, fazendo-me Deus sair errante da casa de meu pai, eu lhe disse: {Seja} esta a graça que me farás em todo o lugar aonde viermos: dize de mim: {É} meu irmão.
Então, tomou Abimeleque ovelhas, e vacas, e servos, e servas e os deu a Abraão; e restituiu-lhe Sara, sua mulher.
E disse Abimeleque: Eis que a minha terra {está} diante da tua face; habita onde bom {for} aos teus olhos.
E a Sara disse: Vês que tenho dado ao teu irmão mil {moedas} de prata; eis que elas te sejam por véu dos olhos para com todos os que contigo {estão} e até para com todos os {outros;} e estás advertida.
E orou Abraão a Deus, e sarou Deus a Abimeleque, e a sua mulher, e as suas servas, de maneira que tiveram filhos;
porque o SENHOR havia fechado totalmente todas as madres da casa de Abimeleque, por causa de Sara, mulher de Abraão.
E o SENHOR visitou a Sara, como tinha dito; e fez o SENHOR a Sara como tinha falado.
E concebeu Sara e deu a Abraão um filho na sua velhice, ao tempo determinado, que Deus lhe tinha dito.
E chamou Abraão o nome de seu filho que lhe nascera, que Sara lhe dera, Isaque.
E Abraão circuncidou o seu filho Isaque, quando era da idade de oito dias, como Deus lhe tinha ordenado.
E {era} Abraão da idade de cem anos, quando lhe nasceu Isaque, seu filho.
E disse Sara: Deus me tem feito riso; e todo aquele que o ouvir se rirá comigo.
Disse mais: Quem diria a Abraão que Sara daria de mamar a filhos, porque lhe dei um filho na sua velhice?
E cresceu o menino e foi desmamado; então, Abraão fez um grande banquete no dia em que Isaque foi desmamado.
E viu Sara que o filho de Agar, a egípcia, que esta tinha dado a Abraão, zombava.
E disse a Abraão: Deita fora esta serva e o seu filho; porque o filho desta serva não herdará com meu filho, com Isaque.
E pareceu esta palavra mui má aos olhos de Abraão, por causa de seu filho.
Porém Deus disse a Abraão: Não te pareça mal aos teus olhos acerca do moço e acerca da tua serva; em tudo o que Sara te diz, ouve a sua voz; porque em Isaque será chamada a tua semente.
Mas também do filho desta serva farei uma nação, porquanto {é} tua semente.
Então, se levantou Abraão pela manhã, de madrugada, e tomou pão e um odre de água, e os deu a Agar, pondo-os sobre o seu ombro; também {lhe deu} o menino e despediu-a; e ela foi-se, andando errante no deserto de Berseba.
E, consumida a água do odre, lançou o menino debaixo de uma das árvores.
E foi-se e assentou-se em frente, afastando-se a distância de um tiro de arco; porque dizia: Que não veja eu morrer o menino. E assentou-se em frente, e levantou a sua voz, e chorou.
E ouviu Deus a voz do menino, e bradou o Anjo de Deus a Agar desde os céus e disse-lhe: Que tens, Agar? Não temas, porque Deus ouviu a voz do rapaz desde o lugar onde {está.}
Ergue-te, levanta o moço e pega-lhe pela mão, porque dele farei uma grande nação.
E abriu-lhe Deus os olhos; e viu um poço de água, e foi-se, e encheu o odre de água, e deu de beber ao moço.
E era Deus com o moço, que cresceu, e habitou no deserto, e foi flecheiro.
E habitou no deserto de Parã; e sua mãe tomou-lhe mulher da terra do Egito.
E aconteceu, naquele mesmo tempo, que Abimeleque, com Ficol, príncipe {ou capitão-mor} do seu exército, falou com Abraão, dizendo: Deus {é} contigo em tudo o que fazes;
agora, pois, jura-me aqui por Deus que me não mentirás a mim, nem a meu filho, nem a meu neto; segundo a beneficência que te fiz, me farás a mim e à terra onde peregrinaste.
E disse Abraão: Eu jurarei.
Abraão, porém, repreendeu a Abimeleque por causa de um poço de água que os servos de Abimeleque haviam tomado por força.
Então, disse Abimeleque: Eu não sei quem fez isto; e também tu mo não fizeste saber, nem eu o ouvi senão hoje.
E tomou Abraão ovelhas e vacas e deu-as a Abimeleque; e fizeram ambos concerto.
Pôs Abraão, porém, à parte sete cordeiras do rebanho.
E Abimeleque disse a Abraão: Para que estão aqui estas sete cordeiras, que puseste à parte?
E disse: Tomarás {estas} sete cordeiras de minha mão, para que sejam em testemunho que eu cavei este poço.
Por isso, se chamou aquele lugar Berseba, {Heb. Beer-Seba, que significa poço do juramento} porquanto ambos juraram ali.
Assim, fizeram concerto em Berseba. Depois, se levantou Abimeleque e Ficol, príncipe do seu exército, e tornaram para a terra dos filisteus.
E plantou um bosque em Berseba e invocou lá o nome do SENHOR, Deus eterno.
E peregrinou Abraão na terra dos filisteus muitos dias.
E aconteceu, depois destas coisas, que tentou Deus a Abraão e disse-lhe: Abraão! E ele disse: Eis-me {aqui.}
E disse: Toma agora o teu filho, o teu único filho, Isaque, a quem amas, e vai-te à terra de Moriá; e oferece-o ali em holocausto sobre uma das montanhas, que eu te direi.
Então, se levantou Abraão pela manhã, de madrugada, e albardou o seu jumento, e tomou consigo dois de seus moços e Isaque, seu filho; e fendeu lenha para o holocausto, e levantou-se, e foi ao lugar que Deus lhe dissera.
Ao terceiro dia, levantou Abraão os seus olhos e viu o lugar de longe.
E disse Abraão a seus moços: Ficai-vos aqui com o jumento, e eu e o moço iremos até ali; e, havendo adorado, tornaremos a vós.
E tomou Abraão a lenha do holocausto e pô-la sobre Isaque, seu filho; e ele tomou o fogo e o cutelo na sua mão. E foram ambos juntos.
Então, falou Isaque a Abraão, seu pai, e disse: Meu pai! E ele disse: Eis-me {aqui,} meu filho! E ele disse: Eis aqui o fogo e a lenha, mas onde {está} o cordeiro para o holocausto?
E disse Abraão: Deus proverá para si o cordeiro para o holocausto, meu filho. Assim, caminharam ambos juntos.
E vieram ao lugar que Deus lhes dissera, e edificou Abraão ali um altar, e pôs em ordem a lenha, e amarrou a Isaque, seu filho, e deitou-o sobre o altar em cima da lenha.
E estendeu Abraão a sua mão e tomou o cutelo para imolar o seu filho.
Mas o Anjo do SENHOR lhe bradou desde os céus e disse: Abraão, Abraão! E ele disse: Eis-me {aqui.}
Então, disse: Não estendas a tua mão sobre o moço e não lhe faças nada; porquanto agora sei que temes a Deus e não me negaste o teu filho, o teu único.
Então, levantou Abraão os seus olhos e olhou, e eis um carneiro detrás {dele,} travado pelas suas pontas num mato; e foi Abraão, e tomou o carneiro, e ofereceu-o em holocausto, em lugar de seu filho.
E chamou Abraão o nome daquele lugar o {Heb. JEOVÁ Jire} SENHOR proverá; donde se diz {até} ao dia de hoje: No monte do SENHOR se proverá.
Então, o Anjo do SENHOR bradou a Abraão pela segunda vez desde os céus
e disse: Por mim mesmo, jurei, diz o SENHOR, porquanto fizeste esta ação e não me negaste o teu filho, o teu único,
que deveras te abençoarei e grandissimamente multiplicarei a tua semente como as estrelas dos céus e como a areia que {está} na praia do mar; e a tua semente possuirá a porta dos seus inimigos.
E em tua semente serão benditas todas as nações da terra, porquanto obedeceste à minha voz.
Então, Abraão tornou aos seus moços, e levantaram-se e foram juntos para Berseba; e Abraão habitou em Berseba.
E sucedeu, depois destas coisas, que anunciaram a Abraão, dizendo: Eis que também Milca deu filhos a Naor, teu irmão:
Uz, o seu primogênito, e Buz, seu irmão, e Quemuel, pai de Arã,
e Quésede, e Hazo, e Pildas, e Jidlafe, e Betuel.
E Betuel gerou Rebeca. Estes oito deu Milca a Naor, irmão de Abraão.
E a sua concubina, cujo nome {era} Reumá, lhe deu também Teba, e Gaã, e Taás, e Maaca.
E foi a vida de Sara cento e vinte e sete anos; {estes foram} os anos da vida de Sara.
E morreu Sara em Quiriate-Arba, que é Hebrom, na terra de Canaã; e veio Abraão lamentar a Sara e chorar por ela.
Depois, se levantou Abraão de diante do seu morto e falou aos filhos de Hete, dizendo:
Estrangeiro e peregrino sou entre vós; dai-me possessão de sepultura convosco, para que eu sepulte o meu morto de diante da minha face.
E responderam os filhos de Hete a Abraão, dizendo-lhe:
Ouve-nos, meu senhor: príncipe de Deus {és} no meio de nós; enterra o teu morto na {mais} escolhida de nossas sepulturas; nenhum de nós te vedará a sua sepultura, para enterrares o teu morto.
Então, se levantou Abraão e inclinou-se diante do povo da terra, diante dos filhos de Hete.
E falou com eles, dizendo: Se é de vossa vontade que eu sepulte o meu morto de diante de minha face, ouvi-me e falai por mim a Efrom, filho de Zoar.
Que ele me dê a cova de Macpela, que {tem} no fim do seu campo; que ma dê pelo devido preço em posse de sepulcro no meio de vós.
Ora, Efrom estava no meio dos filhos de Hete; e respondeu Efrom, heteu, a Abraão, aos ouvidos dos filhos de Hete, de todos os que entravam pela porta da sua cidade, dizendo:
Não, meu senhor; ouve-me: o campo te dou, também te dou a cova que nele {está;} diante dos olhos dos filhos do meu povo ta dou; sepulta o teu morto.
Então, Abraão se inclinou diante da face do povo da terra
e falou a Efrom, aos ouvidos do povo da terra, dizendo: Mas, se tu estás {por isto,} ouve-me, peço-te: o preço do campo {o} darei; toma-o de mim, e sepultarei ali o meu morto.
E respondeu Efrom a Abraão, dizendo-lhe:
Meu senhor, ouve-me: a terra {é} de quatrocentos siclos de prata; que é isto entre mim e ti? Sepulta o teu morto.
E Abraão deu ouvidos a Efrom e Abraão pesou a Efrom a prata de que tinha falado aos ouvidos dos filhos de Hete, quatrocentos siclos de prata, correntes entre mercadores.
Assim, o campo de Efrom, que {estava} em Macpela, em frente de Manre, o campo e a cova que nele {estava,} e todo o arvoredo que no campo {havia,} que {estava} em todo o seu contorno ao redor,
se confirmaram a Abraão em possessão diante dos olhos dos filhos de Hete, de todos os que entravam pela porta da sua cidade.
E, depois, sepultou Abraão a Sara, sua mulher, na cova do campo de Macpela, em frente de Manre, que é Hebrom, na terra de Canaã.
Assim, o campo e a cova que nele {estava} se confirmaram a Abraão, em possessão de sepultura pelos filhos de Hete.
E era Abraão já velho {e} adiantado em idade, e o SENHOR havia abençoado a Abraão em tudo.
E disse Abraão ao seu servo, o mais velho da casa, que tinha o governo sobre tudo o que possuía: Põe agora a tua mão debaixo da minha coxa,
para que eu te faça jurar pelo SENHOR, Deus dos céus e Deus da terra, que não tomarás para meu filho mulher das filhas dos cananeus, no meio dos quais eu habito,
mas que irás à minha terra e à minha parentela e {daí} tomarás mulher para meu filho Isaque.
E disse-lhe o servo: Porventura não quererá seguir-me a mulher a esta terra. Farei, pois, tornar o teu filho à terra de onde saíste?
E Abraão lhe disse: Guarda-te, que não faças lá tornar o meu filho.
O SENHOR, Deus dos céus, que me tomou da casa de meu pai e da terra da minha parentela, e que me falou, e que me jurou, dizendo: À tua semente darei esta terra, ele enviará o seu Anjo adiante da tua face, para que tomes mulher de lá para meu filho.
Se a mulher, porém, não quiser seguir-te, serás livre deste meu juramento; somente não faças lá tornar a meu filho.
Então, pôs o servo a sua mão debaixo da coxa de Abraão, seu senhor, e jurou-lhe sobre este negócio.
E o servo tomou dez camelos, dos camelos do seu senhor, e partiu, pois que toda a fazenda de seu senhor {estava} em sua mão; e levantou-se e partiu para a Mesopotâmia, {que é Síria dos dois rios} para a cidade de Naor.
E fez ajoelhar os camelos fora da cidade, junto a um poço de água, pela tarde, ao tempo em que as moças saíam a tirar {água.}
E disse: Ó SENHOR, Deus de meu senhor Abraão, dá-me, hoje, bom encontro e faze beneficência ao meu senhor Abraão!
Eis que eu estou em pé junto à fonte de água, e as filhas dos varões desta cidade saem para tirar água;
Seja, pois, que a donzela a quem eu disser: abaixa agora o teu cântaro para que eu beba; e ela disser: Bebe, e também darei de beber aos teus camelos, esta {seja} a quem designaste ao teu servo Isaque; e que eu conheça nisso que fizeste beneficência a meu senhor.
E sucedeu que, antes que ele acabasse de falar, eis que Rebeca, que havia nascido a Betuel, filho de Milca, mulher de Naor, irmão de Abraão, saía com o seu cântaro sobre o seu ombro.
E a donzela {era} mui formosa à vista, virgem, a quem varão não havia conhecido; e desceu à fonte, e encheu o seu cântaro, e subiu.
Então, o servo correu-lhe ao encontro e disse: Ora, deixa-me beber um pouco de água do teu cântaro.
E ela disse: Bebe, meu senhor. E apressou-se, e abaixou o seu cântaro sobre a sua mão, e deu-lhe de beber.
E, acabando ela de lhe dar de beber, disse: Tirarei também {água} para os teus camelos, até que acabem de beber.
E apressou-se, e vazou o seu cântaro na pia, e correu outra vez ao poço para tirar {água,} e tirou para todos os seus camelos.
E o varão estava admirado de vê-la, calando-se, para saber se o SENHOR havia prosperado a sua jornada ou não.
E aconteceu que, acabando os camelos de beber, tomou o varão um pendente de ouro de meio siclo de peso e duas pulseiras para as suas mãos, do peso de dez {siclos} de ouro,
e disse: De quem {és} filha? Faze-mo saber, peço-te; há também em casa de teu pai lugar para nós pousarmos?
E ela disse: Eu {sou} filha de Betuel, filho de Milca, o qual ela deu a Naor.
Disse-lhe mais: Também temos palha, e muito pasto, e lugar para passar a noite.
Então, inclinou-se aquele varão, e adorou ao SENHOR,
e disse: Bendito {seja} o SENHOR, Deus de meu senhor Abraão, que não retirou a sua beneficência e a sua verdade de meu senhor; quanto a mim, o SENHOR me guiou no caminho à casa dos irmãos de meu senhor.
E a donzela correu e fez saber estas coisas na casa de sua mãe.
E Rebeca tinha um irmão cujo nome {era} Labão; e Labão correu ao encontro daquele varão à fonte.
E aconteceu que, quando ele viu o pendente e as pulseiras sobre as mãos de sua irmã e quando ouviu as palavras de sua irmã Rebeca, que dizia: Assim me falou aquele varão, veio ao varão, e eis que estava em pé junto aos camelos, junto à fonte.
E disse: Entra, bendito do SENHOR, por que estarás fora? Pois eu já preparei a casa e o lugar para os camelos.
Então, veio aquele varão à casa, e desataram os camelos e deram palha e pasto aos camelos e água para lavar os pés dele e os pés dos varões que {estavam} com ele.
Depois, puseram de comer diante dele. Ele, porém, disse: Não comerei, até que tenha dito as minhas palavras. E ele disse: Fala.
Então, disse: Eu {sou} o servo de Abraão.
O SENHOR abençoou muito o meu senhor, de maneira que foi engrandecido; e deu-lhe ovelhas e vacas, e prata e ouro, e servos e servas, e camelos e jumentos.
E Sara, a mulher do meu senhor, gerou um filho a meu senhor depois da sua velhice; e ele deu-lhe tudo quanto tem.
E meu senhor me fez jurar, dizendo: Não tomarás mulher para meu filho das filhas dos cananeus, em cuja terra habito;
irás, porém, à casa de meu pai e à minha família e tomarás mulher para meu filho.
Então, disse eu ao meu senhor: Porventura não me seguirá a mulher.
E {ele} me disse: O SENHOR, em cuja presença tenho andado, enviará o seu Anjo contigo e prosperará o teu caminho, para que tomes mulher para meu filho da minha família e da casa de meu pai.
Então, serás livre do meu juramento, quando fores à minha família; e, se não ta derem, livre serás do meu juramento.
E hoje cheguei à fonte e disse: Ó SENHOR, Deus de meu senhor Abraão, se tu, agora, prosperas o meu caminho, no qual eu ando,
eis que estou junto à fonte de água; seja, pois, que a donzela que sair para tirar {água} e à qual eu disser: Ora, dá-me um pouco de água do teu cântaro,
e ela me disser: Bebe tu também e também tirarei água para os teus camelos, esta {seja} a mulher que o SENHOR designou ao filho de meu senhor.
E, antes que eu acabasse de falar no meu coração, eis que Rebeca saía com seu cântaro sobre o seu ombro, e desceu à fonte, e tirou {água;} e eu lhe disse: Ora, dá-me de beber.
E ela se apressou, e abaixou o seu cântaro de sobre si, e disse: Bebe, e também darei de beber aos teus camelos; e bebi, e ela deu também de beber aos camelos.
Então, lhe perguntei e disse: De quem {és} filha? E ela disse: Filha de Betuel, filho de Naor, que lhe gerou Milca. Então, eu pus o pendente no seu rosto e as pulseiras sobre as suas mãos.
E, inclinando-me, adorei ao SENHOR e bendisse ao SENHOR, Deus do meu senhor Abraão, que me havia encaminhado pelo caminho da verdade, para tomar a filha do irmão de meu senhor para seu filho.
Agora, pois, se vós haveis de mostrar beneficência e verdade a meu senhor, fazei-mo saber; e, se não, {também} mo fazei saber, para que eu olhe à mão direita ou à esquerda.
Então, responderam Labão e Betuel e disseram: Do SENHOR procedeu este negócio; não podemos falar-te mal ou bem.
Eis que Rebeca {está} diante da tua face; toma-a e vai-te; seja a mulher do filho de teu senhor, como tem dito o SENHOR.
E aconteceu que o servo de Abraão, ouvindo as suas palavras, inclinou-se à terra diante do SENHOR;
e tirou o servo vasos {ou jóias} de prata, e vasos de ouro, e vestes e deu-os a Rebeca; também deu coisas preciosas a seu irmão e a sua mãe.
Então, comeram, e beberam, ele e os varões que com ele estavam, e passaram a noite. E levantaram-se pela manhã, e disse: Deixai-me ir a meu senhor.
Então, disseram seu irmão e sua mãe: Fique a donzela conosco {alguns} dias ou pelo menos dez dias; e depois irá.
Ele, porém, lhes disse: Não me detenhais, pois o SENHOR tem prosperado o meu caminho; deixai-me partir, para que eu volte a meu senhor.
E disseram: Chamemos a donzela e perguntemos-lho.
E chamaram Rebeca e disseram-lhe: Irás tu com este varão? Ela respondeu: Irei.
Então, despediram Rebeca, sua irmã, e a sua ama, e o servo de Abraão, e os seus varões.
E abençoaram Rebeca e disseram-lhe: Ó nossa irmã, sejas tu em milhares de milhares, e que a tua semente possua a porta de seus aborrecedores!
E Rebeca se levantou com as suas moças, e subiram sobre os camelos e seguiram o varão; e tomou aquele servo a Rebeca e partiu.
Ora, Isaque vinha do caminho do poço de Laai-Roi, porque habitava na terra do Sul.
E Isaque saíra a orar {ou meditar} no campo, sobre a tarde; e levantou os olhos, e olhou e eis que os camelos vinham.
Rebeca também levantou os olhos, e viu a Isaque, e lançou-se do camelo,
e disse ao servo: Quem {é} aquele varão que vem pelo campo ao nosso encontro? E o servo disse: Este {é} meu senhor. Então, tomou ela o véu e cobriu-se.
E o servo contou a Isaque todas as coisas que fizera.
E Isaque trouxe-a para a tenda de sua mãe, Sara, e tomou a Rebeca, e foi-lhe por mulher, e amou-a. Assim, Isaque foi consolado depois da {morte} de sua mãe.
E Abraão tomou {outra} mulher; o seu nome {era} Quetura.
E gerou-lhe Zinrã, e Jocsã, e Medã, e Midiã, e Isbaque, e Suá.
E Jocsã gerou a Seba e a Dedã; e os filhos de Dedã foram Assurim, e Letusim, e Leumim.
E os filhos de Midiã foram Efá, e Efer, e Enoque, e Abida, e Elda; estes todos {foram} filhos de Quetura.
Porém Abraão deu tudo o que tinha a Isaque.
Mas, aos filhos das concubinas que Abraão tinha, deu Abraão presentes e, vivendo ele ainda, despediu-os do seu filho Isaque, ao Oriente, para a terra oriental.
Estes, pois, {são} os dias dos anos da vida de Abraão, que viveu cento e setenta e cinco anos.
E Abraão expirou e morreu em boa velhice, velho e farto {de dias;} e foi congregado ao seu povo.
E sepultaram-no Isaque e Ismael, seus filhos, na cova de Macpela, no campo de Efrom, filho de Zoar, heteu, que {estava} em frente de Manre,
o campo que Abraão comprara aos filhos de Hete. Ali está sepultado Abraão e Sara, sua mulher.
E aconteceu, depois da morte de Abraão, que Deus abençoou a Isaque, seu filho; e habitava Isaque junto ao poço Laai-Roi.
Estas, porém, são as gerações de Ismael, filho de Abraão, que a serva de Sara, Agar, egípcia, deu a Abraão.
E estes são os nomes dos filhos de Ismael pelos seus nomes, segundo as suas gerações: o primogênito de Ismael {era} Nebaiote, depois Quedar, e Abdeel, e Mibsão,
e Misma, e Dumá, e Massá,
e Hadade, e Tema, e Jetur, e Nafis, e Quedemá.
Estes {são} os filhos de Ismael, e estes {são} os seus nomes pelas suas vilas e pelos seus castelos: {ou acampamentos} doze príncipes segundo as suas famílias. {ou nações}
E estes {são} os anos da vida de Ismael, {que viveu} cento e trinta e sete anos; e ele expirou, e morreu, e foi congregado ao seu povo.
E habitaram desde Havilá até Sur, que {está} em frente do Egito, indo para Assur; {ou Assíria} e {Ismael} fez o seu assento diante da face de todos os seus irmãos.
E estas {são} as gerações de Isaque, filho de Abraão: Abraão gerou a Isaque;
e era Isaque da idade de quarenta anos, quando tomou a Rebeca, filha de Betuel, arameu {ou siro} de Padã-Arã, irmã de Labão, arameu, por sua mulher.
E Isaque orou instantemente ao SENHOR por sua mulher, porquanto {era} estéril; e o SENHOR ouviu as suas orações, e Rebeca, sua mulher, concebeu.
E os filhos lutavam dentro dela; então, disse: Se assim {é,} por que {sou} eu {assim?} E foi-se a perguntar ao SENHOR.
E o SENHOR lhe disse: Duas nações {há} no teu ventre, e dois povos se dividirão das tuas entranhas: {um} povo será mais forte do que o {outro} povo, e o maior servirá ao menor.
E, cumprindo-se os seus dias para dar à luz, eis gêmeos no seu ventre.
E saiu o primeiro, ruivo e todo como uma veste cabeluda; por isso, chamaram o seu nome Esaú. {que significa cabeludo}
E, depois, saiu o seu irmão, agarrada sua mão ao calcanhar de Esaú; por isso, se chamou o seu nome Jacó. {que significa suplantador} E {era} Isaque da idade de sessenta anos quando os gerou.
E cresceram os meninos. E Esaú foi varão perito na caça, varão do campo; mas Jacó {era} varão simples, habitando em tendas.
E amava Isaque a Esaú, porque a caça era de seu gosto; mas Rebeca amava a Jacó.
E Jacó cozera um guisado; e veio Esaú do campo e {estava} ele cansado. {ou desfalecido}
E disse Esaú a Jacó: Deixa-me, peço-te, comer desse {guisado} vermelho, porque estou cansado. Por isso, se chamou o seu nome Edom. {que significa vermelho}
Então, disse Jacó: Vende-me, hoje, a tua primogenitura.
E disse Esaú: Eis que estou a ponto de morrer, e para que me {servirá} logo a primogenitura?
Então, disse Jacó: Jura-me hoje. E jurou-lhe e vendeu a sua primogenitura a Jacó.
E Jacó deu pão a Esaú e o guisado das lentilhas; e ele comeu, e bebeu, e levantou-se, e foi-se. Assim, desprezou Esaú a {sua} primogenitura.
E havia fome na terra, além da primeira fome, que foi nos dias de Abraão; por isso, foi-se Isaque a Abimeleque, rei dos filisteus, em Gerar.
E apareceu-lhe o SENHOR e disse: Não desças ao Egito. Habita na terra que eu te disser;
peregrina nesta terra, e serei contigo e te abençoarei; porque a ti e à tua semente darei todas estas terras e confirmarei o juramento que tenho jurado a Abraão, teu pai.
E multiplicarei a tua semente como as estrelas dos céus e darei à tua semente todas estas terras. E em tua semente serão benditas todas as nações da terra,
porquanto Abraão obedeceu à minha voz e guardou o meu mandado, os meus preceitos, os meus estatutos e as minhas leis.
Assim, habitou Isaque em Gerar.
E, perguntando-lhe os varões daquele lugar acerca de sua mulher, disse: {É} minha irmã; porque temia dizer: {É} minha mulher; para que porventura {dizia ele} me não matem os varões daquele lugar por amor de Rebeca; porque {era} formosa à vista.
E aconteceu que, como ele esteve ali muito tempo, Abimeleque, rei dos filisteus, olhou por uma janela e viu, e eis que Isaque {estava} brincando com Rebeca, sua mulher.
Então, chamou Abimeleque a Isaque e disse: Eis que, na verdade, {é} tua mulher; como, pois, disseste: {É} minha irmã? E disse-lhe Isaque: Porque eu dizia: Para que eu porventura não morra por causa dela.
E disse Abimeleque: Que {é} isto {que} nos fizeste? Facilmente se teria deitado alguém deste povo com a tua mulher, e tu terias trazido sobre nós um delito.
E mandou Abimeleque a todo o povo, dizendo: Qualquer que tocar neste varão ou em sua mulher certamente morrerá.
E semeou Isaque naquela mesma terra e colheu, naquele mesmo ano, cem {ou o cêntuplo} medidas, porque o SENHOR o abençoava.
E engrandeceu-se o varão e ia-se engrandecendo, até que se tornou mui grande;
e tinha possessão de ovelhas, e possessão de vacas, e muita gente de serviço, de maneira que os filisteus o invejavam.
E todos os poços que os servos de seu pai tinham cavado nos dias de Abraão, seu pai, os filisteus entulharam e encheram de terra.
Disse também Abimeleque a Isaque: Aparta-te de nós, porque muito mais poderoso te tens feito do que nós.
Então, Isaque foi-se dali, e fez o seu assento no vale de Gerar, e habitou lá.
E tornou Isaque, e cavou os poços de água que cavaram nos dias de Abraão, seu pai, e que os filisteus taparam depois da morte de Abraão, e chamou-os pelos nomes que os chamara seu pai.
Cavaram, pois, os servos de Isaque naquele vale e acharam ali um poço de águas vivas.
E os pastores de Gerar porfiaram com os pastores de Isaque, dizendo: Esta água {é} nossa. Por isso, chamou o nome daquele poço Eseque, {que significa contenda} porque contenderam com ele.
Então, cavaram outro poço e também porfiaram sobre ele. Por isso, chamou o seu nome Sitna. {que significa inimizade}
E partiu dali e cavou outro poço; e não porfiaram sobre ele. Por isso, chamou o seu nome Reobote {que significa alargamento} e disse: Porque agora nos alargou o SENHOR, e crescemos nesta terra.
Depois, subiu dali a Berseba,
e apareceu-lhe o SENHOR naquela mesma noite e disse: Eu {sou} o Deus de Abraão, teu pai. Não temas, porque eu {sou} contigo, e abençoar-te-ei, e multiplicarei a tua semente por amor de Abraão, meu servo.
Então, edificou ali um altar, e invocou o nome do SENHOR, e armou ali a sua tenda; e os servos de Isaque cavaram ali um poço.
E Abimeleque veio a ele de Gerar, com Ausate, seu amigo, e Ficol, príncipe {ou capitão-mor} do seu exército.
E disse-lhe Isaque: Por que viestes a mim, pois que vós me aborreceis e me enviastes de vós?
E eles disseram: Havemos visto, na verdade, que o SENHOR é contigo; pelo que dissemos: Haja, agora, juramento entre nós, entre nós e ti; e façamos concerto contigo.
Que nos não faças mal, como nós te não temos tocado, e como te fizemos somente bem, e te deixamos ir em paz. Agora, tu {és} o bendito do SENHOR.
Então, lhes fez um banquete, e comeram e beberam.
E levantaram-se de madrugada e juraram um ao outro; depois, os despediu Isaque, e despediram-se dele, em paz.
E aconteceu, naquele mesmo dia, que vieram os servos de Isaque, e anunciaram-lhe acerca do negócio do poço, que tinham cavado, e disseram-lhe: Temos achado água.
E chamou-o Seba. {que significa juramento} Por isso, {é} o nome daquela cidade Berseba {Heb. Beer-Seba, que significa poço do juramento} até o dia de hoje.
Ora, sendo Esaú da idade de quarenta anos, tomou por mulher a Judite, filha de Beeri, heteu, e a Basemate, filha de Elom, heteu.
E {estas} foram para Isaque e Rebeca uma amargura de espírito.
E aconteceu que, como Isaque envelheceu, e os seus olhos se escureceram, de maneira que não podia ver, chamou a Esaú, seu filho mais velho, e disse-lhe: Meu filho! E ele lhe disse: Eis-me {aqui!}
E ele disse: Eis que já agora estou velho e não sei o dia da minha morte.
Agora, pois, toma as tuas armas, a tua aljava e o teu arco, e sai ao campo, e apanha para mim {alguma} caça,
e faze-me um guisado saboroso, como eu gosto, e traze-mo, para que eu coma, e para que minha alma te abençoe, antes que morra.
E Rebeca escutou quando Isaque falava ao seu filho Esaú; e foi-se Esaú ao campo, para apanhar caça que havia de trazer.
Então, falou Rebeca a Jacó, seu filho, dizendo: Eis que tenho ouvido o teu pai que falava com Esaú, teu irmão, dizendo:
Traze-me caça e faze-me um guisado saboroso, para que eu coma e te abençoe diante da face do SENHOR, antes da minha morte.
Agora, pois, filho meu, ouve a minha voz naquilo que eu te mando.
Vai, agora, ao rebanho e traze-me de lá dois bons cabritos; e eu farei deles um guisado saboroso para teu pai, como ele gosta;
e levá-lo-ás a teu pai, para que o coma e para que te abençoe antes da sua morte.
Então, disse Jacó a Rebeca, sua mãe: Eis que Esaú, meu irmão, {é} varão cabeludo, e eu, varão liso.
Porventura, me apalpará o meu pai, e serei, a seus olhos, enganador; assim, trarei eu sobre mim maldição e não bênção.
E disse-lhe sua mãe: Meu filho, sobre mim {seja} a tua maldição; somente obedece à minha voz, e vai, e traze-m{os.}
E foi, e tomou-os, e trouxe-os à sua mãe; e sua mãe fez um guisado saboroso, como seu pai gostava.
Depois, tomou Rebeca as vestes {ou vestes preciosas} de gala de Esaú, seu filho mais velho, que {tinha} consigo em casa, e vestiu a Jacó, seu filho menor.
E, com as peles dos cabritos, cobriu as suas mãos e a lisura do seu pescoço
e deu o guisado saboroso e o pão que tinha preparado na mão de Jacó, seu filho.
E veio ele a seu pai e disse: Meu pai! E ele disse: Eis-me {aqui.} Quem {és} tu, meu filho?
E Jacó disse a seu pai: Eu {sou} Esaú, teu primogênito. Tenho feito como me disseste. Levanta-te agora, assenta-te e come da minha caça, para que a tua alma me abençoe.
Então, disse Isaque a seu filho: Como {é isto, que} tão cedo {a} achaste, filho meu? E ele disse: Porque o SENHOR, teu Deus, {a} mandou ao meu encontro.
E disse Isaque a Jacó: Chega-te agora, para que te apalpe, meu filho, se {és} meu filho Esaú mesmo ou não.
Então, se chegou Jacó a Isaque, seu pai, que o apalpou e disse: A voz {é} a voz de Jacó, porém as mãos {são} as mãos de Esaú.
E não o conheceu, porquanto as suas mãos estavam cabeludas, como as mãos de Esaú, seu irmão. E abençoou-o.
E disse: {És} tu meu filho Esaú mesmo? E ele disse: Eu {sou.}
Então, disse: Faze chegar isso perto de mim, para que coma da caça de meu filho; para que a minha alma te abençoe. E chegou-lho, e comeu; trouxe-lhe também vinho, e bebeu.
E disse-lhe Isaque, seu pai: Ora, chega-te e beija-me, filho meu.
E chegou-se e beijou-o. Então, cheirou o cheiro das suas vestes, e abençoou-o, e disse: Eis que o cheiro do meu filho {é} como o cheiro do campo, que o SENHOR abençoou.
Assim, pois, te dê Deus do orvalho dos céus, e das gorduras da terra, e abundância de trigo e de mosto.
Sirvam-te povos, e nações se encurvem a ti; sê senhor de teus irmãos, e os filhos da tua mãe se encurvem a ti; malditos {sejam} os que te amaldiçoarem, e benditos {sejam} os que te abençoarem.
E aconteceu que, acabando Isaque de abençoar a Jacó, apenas Jacó acabava de sair da face de Isaque, seu pai, veio Esaú, seu irmão, da sua caça.
E fez também ele um guisado saboroso, e trouxe-o a seu pai, e disse a seu pai: Levanta-te, meu pai, e come da caça de teu filho, para que me abençoe a tua alma.
E disse-lhe Isaque, seu pai: Quem {és} tu? E ele disse: Eu sou teu filho, o teu primogênito, Esaú.
Então, estremeceu Isaque de um estremecimento muito grande e disse: Quem, pois, {é} aquele que apanhou a caça e {ma} trouxe? Eu comi de tudo, antes que tu viesses, e abençoei-o; também será bendito.
Esaú, ouvindo as palavras de seu pai, bradou com grande e mui amargo brado e disse a seu pai: Abençoa-me também a mim, meu pai.
E ele disse: Veio o teu irmão com sutileza e tomou a tua bênção.
Então, disse ele: Não foi o seu nome {justamente} chamado Jacó? Por isso, que já duas vezes me enganou: a minha primogenitura {me} tomou e eis que agora {me} tomou a minha bênção. E disse mais: Não reservaste, pois, para mim bênção alguma?
Então, respondeu Isaque e disse a Esaú: Eis que o tenho posto por senhor sobre ti, e todos os seus irmãos lhe tenho dado por servos; e de trigo e de mosto o tenho fortalecido; que te farei, pois, agora {a ti,} meu filho?
E disse Esaú a seu pai: Tens uma só bênção, meu pai? Abençoa-me também a mim, meu pai. E levantou Esaú a sua voz e chorou.
Então, respondeu Isaque, seu pai, e disse-lhe: Eis que a tua habitação será longe das gorduras da terra e sem orvalho dos céus.
E pela tua espada viverás e ao teu irmão servirás. Acontecerá, porém, que, quando te libertares, então, sacudirás o seu jugo do teu pescoço.
E aborreceu Esaú a Jacó por causa daquela bênção, com que seu pai o tinha abençoado; e Esaú disse no seu coração: Chegar-se-ão os dias de luto de meu pai; então, matarei a Jacó, meu irmão.
E foram denunciadas a Rebeca estas palavras de Esaú, seu filho mais velho; e ela enviou, e chamou a Jacó, seu filho menor, e disse-lhe: Eis que Esaú, teu irmão, se consola a teu respeito, {propondo-se} matar-te.
Agora, pois, meu filho, ouve a minha voz: levanta-te e acolhe-te a Labão, meu irmão, em Harã;
e mora com ele alguns dias, até que passe o furor de teu irmão,
até que se desvie de ti a ira de teu irmão, e se esqueça do que lhe fizeste. Então, enviarei e te farei vir de lá. Por que seria eu desfilhada também de vós ambos num mesmo dia?
E disse Rebeca a Isaque: Enfadada estou da minha vida, por causa das filhas de Hete; se Jacó tomar mulher das filhas de Hete, como estas {são} das filhas desta terra, para que me {será} a vida?
E Isaque chamou a Jacó, e abençoou-o, e ordenou-lhe, e disse-lhe: Não tomes mulher de entre as filhas de Canaã.
Levanta-te, vai a Padã-Arã, à casa de Betuel, pai de tua mãe, e toma de lá uma mulher das filhas de Labão, irmão de tua mãe.
E Deus Todo-poderoso te abençoe, e te faça frutificar, e te multiplique, para que sejas uma multidão de povos;
e te dê a bênção de Abraão, a ti e à tua semente contigo, para que em herança possuas a terra de tuas peregrinações, que Deus deu a Abraão.
Assim, enviou Isaque a Jacó, o qual se foi a Padã-Arã, a Labão, filho de Betuel, arameu, {ou siro} irmão de Rebeca, mãe de Jacó e de Esaú.
Vendo, pois, Esaú que Isaque abençoara a Jacó, e o enviara a Padã-Arã, para tomar mulher para si dali, {e} que, abençoando-o, lhe ordenara, dizendo: Não tomes mulher das filhas de Canaã;
e que Jacó obedecera a seu pai e a sua mãe e se fora a Padã-Arã;
vendo também Esaú que as filhas de Canaã eram más aos olhos de Isaque, seu pai,
foi-se Esaú a Ismael e tomou para si por mulher, além das suas mulheres, a Maalate, filha de Ismael, filho de Abraão, e irmã de Nebaiote.
Partiu, pois, Jacó de Berseba, e foi-se a Harã.
E chegou a um lugar onde passou a noite, porque já o sol era posto; e tomou uma das pedras daquele lugar, e {a} pôs por sua cabeceira, e deitou-se naquele lugar.
E sonhou: e eis {era} posta na terra uma escada cujo topo tocava nos céus; e eis que os anjos de Deus subiam e desciam por ela.
E eis que o SENHOR estava em cima dela e disse: Eu {sou} o SENHOR, o Deus de Abraão, teu pai, e o Deus de Isaque. Esta terra em que {estás} deitado ta darei a ti e à tua semente.
E a tua semente será como o pó da terra; e estender-se-á ao ocidente, e ao oriente, e ao norte, e ao sul; e em ti e na tua semente serão benditas todas as famílias da terra.
E eis que {estou} contigo, e te guardarei por onde quer que fores, e te farei tornar a esta terra, porque te não deixarei, até que te haja feito o que te tenho dito.
Acordado, pois, Jacó do seu sono, disse: Na verdade o SENHOR está neste lugar, e eu não o sabia.
E temeu e disse: Quão terrível {é} este lugar! Este não {é outro lugar} senão a Casa de Deus; e esta {é} a porta dos céus.
Então, levantou-se Jacó pela manhã, de madrugada, e tomou a pedra que tinha posto por sua cabeceira, e a pôs por coluna, e derramou azeite em cima dela.
E chamou o nome daquele lugar Betel; {que significa Casa de Deus} o nome, porém, daquela cidade, dantes, {era} Luz.
E Jacó fez um voto, dizendo: Se Deus for comigo, e me guardar nesta viagem que faço, e me der pão para comer e vestes para vestir,
e eu em paz tornar à casa de meu pai, o SENHOR será o meu Deus;
e esta pedra, que tenho posto por coluna, será Casa de Deus; e, de tudo quanto me deres, certamente te darei o dízimo.
Então, pôs-se Jacó a pé e foi-se à terra dos filhos do Oriente.
E olhou, e eis um poço no campo, e eis três rebanhos de ovelhas que estavam deitados junto a ele; porque daquele poço davam de beber aos rebanhos; e {havia} uma grande pedra sobre a boca do poço.
E ajuntavam ali todos os rebanhos, e removiam a pedra de sobre a boca do poço, e davam de beber às ovelhas, e tornavam {a pôr} a pedra sobre a boca do poço, no seu lugar.
E disse-lhes Jacó: Meus irmãos, donde {sois?} E disseram: {Somos} de Harã.
E ele lhes disse: Conheceis a Labão, filho de Naor? E disseram: Conhecemos.
Disse-lhes mais: Está ele bem? E disseram: Está bem, e eis aqui Raquel, sua filha, que vem com as ovelhas.
E ele disse: Eis que ainda é muito dia, não {é} tempo de ajuntar o gado; dai de beber às ovelhas, e ide, e apascentai-{as.}
E disseram: Não podemos, até que todos os rebanhos se ajuntem, e removam a pedra de sobre a boca do poço, para que demos de beber às ovelhas.
{Estando} ele ainda falando com eles, veio Raquel com as ovelhas de seu pai; porque ela {era} pastora.
E aconteceu que, vendo Jacó a Raquel, filha de Labão, irmão de sua mãe, e as ovelhas de Labão, irmão de sua mãe, chegou Jacó, e revolveu a pedra de sobre a boca do poço, e deu de beber às ovelhas de Labão, irmão de sua mãe.
E Jacó beijou a Raquel, e levantou a sua voz, e chorou.
E Jacó anunciou a Raquel que {era} irmão de seu pai e que {era} filho de Rebeca. Então, ela correu e o anunciou a seu pai.
E aconteceu que, ouvindo Labão as novas de Jacó, filho de sua irmã, correu-lhe ao encontro, e abraçou-o, e beijou-o, e levou-o à sua casa. E contou ele a Labão todas estas coisas.
Então, Labão disse-lhe: Verdadeiramente {és} tu o meu osso e a minha carne. E ficou com ele um mês inteiro.
Depois, disse Labão a Jacó: Porque tu {és} meu irmão, hás de servir-me de graça? Declara-me qual {será} o teu salário.
E Labão tinha duas filhas; o nome da mais velha {era} Léia, e o nome da menor, Raquel.
Léia, porém, {tinha} olhos tenros, {ou enfermos} mas Raquel era de formoso semblante e formosa à vista.
E Jacó amava a Raquel e disse: Sete anos te servirei por Raquel, tua filha menor.
Então, disse Labão: Melhor {é} que eu ta dê do que a dê a outro varão; fica comigo.
Assim, serviu Jacó sete anos por Raquel; e foram aos seus olhos como poucos dias, pelo muito que a amava.
E disse Jacó a Labão: Dá-{me} minha mulher, porque meus dias são cumpridos, para que eu entre a ela.
Então, ajuntou Labão todos os varões daquele lugar e fez um banquete.
E aconteceu, à tarde, que tomou Léia, sua filha, e trouxe-lha. E entrou a ela.
E Labão deu sua serva Zilpa {por} serva a Léia, sua filha.
E aconteceu pela manhã ver que {era} Léia; pelo que disse a Labão: Por que me fizeste isso? Não te tenho servido por Raquel? Por que, pois, me enganaste?
E disse Labão: Não se faz assim no nosso lugar, que a menor se dê antes da primogênita.
Cumpre a semana desta; então te daremos também a outra, pelo serviço que ainda outros sete anos servires comigo.
E Jacó fez assim e cumpriu a semana desta; então, lhe deu por mulher Raquel, sua filha.
E Labão deu sua serva Bila por serva a Raquel, sua filha.
E entrou também a Raquel e amou também a Raquel mais do que a Léia; e serviu com ele ainda outros sete anos.
Vendo, pois, o SENHOR que Léia {era} aborrecida, abriu a sua madre; porém Raquel {era} estéril.
E concebeu Léia, e teve um filho, e chamou o seu nome Rúben, {que significa Eis um filho} dizendo: Porque o SENHOR atendeu à minha aflição. Por isso, agora me amará o meu marido.
E concebeu outra vez e teve um filho, dizendo: Porquanto o SENHOR ouviu que eu {era} aborrecida, me deu também este; e chamou o seu nome Simeão. {que significa ouvindo}
E concebeu outra vez e teve um filho, dizendo: Agora, esta vez se ajuntará meu marido comigo, porque três filhos lhe tenho dado; por isso, chamou o seu nome Levi. {que significa junto}
E concebeu outra vez e teve um filho, dizendo: Esta vez louvarei ao SENHOR. Por isso, chamou o seu nome Judá; {que significa louvor} e cessou de ter filhos.
Vendo, pois, Raquel que não dava filhos a Jacó, teve Raquel inveja de sua irmã e disse a Jacó: Dá-me filhos, senão morro.
Então, se acendeu a ira de Jacó contra Raquel e disse: {Estou} eu no lugar de Deus, que te impediu o fruto de teu ventre?
E ela disse: Eis aqui minha serva Bila; entra a ela, para que tenha filhos sobre os meus joelhos, e eu assim receba {ou tenha filhos} filhos por ela.
Assim, lhe deu a Bila, sua serva, por mulher; e Jacó entrou a ela.
E concebeu Bila e deu a Jacó um filho.
Então, disse Raquel: Julgou-me Deus, e também ouviu a minha voz, e me deu um filho; por isso, chamou o seu nome Dã. {que significa juiz}
E Bila, serva de Raquel, concebeu outra vez e deu a Jacó o segundo filho.
Então, disse Raquel: Com lutas de Deus, tenho lutado com minha irmã e também venci; e chamou o seu nome Naftali. {que significa lutando}
Vendo, pois, Léia que cessava de gerar, tomou também a Zilpa, sua serva, e deu-a a Jacó por mulher.
E deu Zilpa, serva de Léia, um filho a Jacó.
Então, disse Léia: Vem {Heb. Vem uma fortuna} uma turba; e chamou o seu nome de Gade. {que significa fortuna}
Depois, deu Zilpa, serva de Léia, um segundo filho a Jacó.
Então, disse Léia: Para {Heb. Sou feliz} minha ventura, porque as filhas me terão por bem-aventurada; e chamou o seu nome Aser. {que significa feliz}
E foi Rúben, nos dias da sega do trigo, e achou mandrágoras no campo. E trouxe-as a Léia, sua mãe. Então, disse Raquel a Léia: Ora, dá-me das mandrágoras do teu filho.
E ela lhe disse: {É já} pouco que hajas tomado o meu marido? Tomarás também as mandrágoras do meu filho? Então, disse Raquel: Por isso, se deitará contigo esta noite pelas mandrágoras de teu filho.
Vindo, pois, Jacó, à tarde, do campo, saiu-lhe Léia ao encontro e disse: A mim entrarás, porque certamente te aluguei com as mandrágoras do meu filho. E deitou-se com ela aquela noite.
E ouviu Deus a Léia, e concebeu e teve um quinto filho.
Então, disse Léia: Deus {me} tem dado o meu galardão, pois tenho dado minha serva ao meu marido. E chamou o seu nome Issacar. {que significa galardão}
E Léia concebeu outra vez e deu a Jacó um sexto filho.
E disse Léia: Deus me deu a mim uma boa dádiva; desta vez morará o meu marido comigo, porque lhe tenho dado seis filhos. E chamou o seu nome Zebulom. {que significa morada}
E, depois, teve uma filha e chamou o seu nome Diná. {que significa julgada}
E lembrou-se Deus de Raquel, e Deus a ouviu, e abriu a sua madre.
E ela concebeu, e teve um filho, e disse: Tirou-me Deus a minha vergonha.
E chamou o seu nome José, {que significa aumentador} dizendo: O SENHOR me acrescente outro filho.
E aconteceu que, quando Raquel teve a José, disse Jacó a Labão: Deixa-me ir; que me vá ao meu lugar e à minha terra.
Dá-{me} os meus filhos e as minhas mulheres, pelas quais te tenho servido, e ir-me-ei; pois tu sabes o meu serviço, que te tenho feito.
Então, lhe disse Labão: Se, agora, tenho achado graça a teus olhos, {fica comigo.} Tenho {Heb. Tenho adivinhado} experimentado que o SENHOR me abençoou por amor de ti.
E disse mais: Determina-me o teu salário, que {to} darei.
Então, lhe disse: Tu sabes como te tenho servido e como passou o teu gado comigo.
Porque o pouco que tinhas antes de mim é aumentado até uma multidão; e o SENHOR te tem abençoado por meu trabalho. Agora, pois, quando hei de trabalhar também por minha casa?
E disse {ele:} Que te darei? Então, disse Jacó: Nada me darás; tornarei a apascentar {e} a guardar o teu rebanho, se me fizeres isto:
passarei hoje por todo o teu rebanho, separando dele todos os salpicados e malhados, e todos os morenos entre os cordeiros, e o que é malhado e salpicado entre as cabras; e {isto} será o meu salário.
Assim, testificará por mim a minha justiça no dia de amanhã, quando vieres e o meu salário estiver diante de tua face; tudo o que não for salpicado e malhado entre as cabras e moreno entre os cordeiros ser-me-á por furto.
Então, disse Labão: Tomara que seja conforme a tua palavra.
E separou, naquele mesmo dia, os bodes listrados e malhados e todas as cabras salpicadas e malhadas, tudo em que {havia} brancura e todo o moreno entre os cordeiros; e deu-os nas mãos dos seus filhos.
E pôs três dias de caminho entre si e Jacó; e Jacó apascentava o resto dos rebanhos de Labão.
Então, tomou Jacó varas verdes de álamo, e de aveleira, e de castanheiro e descascou nelas riscas brancas, descobrindo a brancura que nas varas {havia,}
e pôs estas varas, que tinha descascado, em frente do rebanho, nos canos e nas pias de água, aonde o rebanho vinha a beber, e conceberam vindo a beber.
E concebia o rebanho diante das varas, e as ovelhas davam crias listradas, salpicadas e malhadas.
Então, separou Jacó os cordeiros e pôs as faces do rebanho para os listrados e todo moreno entre o rebanho de Labão; e pôs o seu rebanho à parte e não o pôs com o rebanho de Labão.
E sucedia que, cada vez que concebiam as ovelhas fortes, punha Jacó as varas diante dos olhos do rebanho nos canos, para que concebessem diante das varas.
Mas, quando enfraqueceu o rebanho, não as pôs. Assim, as fracas eram de Labão, e as fortes, de Jacó.
E cresceu o varão em grande maneira; e teve muitos rebanhos, e servas, e servos, e camelos, e jumentos.
Então, ouvia as palavras dos filhos de Labão, que diziam: Jacó tem tomado tudo o que {era} de nosso pai e do que {era} de nosso pai fez ele toda esta glória. {ou riqueza}
Viu também Jacó o rosto de Labão, e eis que não {era} para com ele como dantes.
E disse o SENHOR a Jacó: Torna à terra dos teus pais e à tua parentela, e eu serei contigo.
Então, enviou Jacó e chamou a Raquel e a Léia ao campo, ao seu rebanho.
E disse-lhes: Vejo que o rosto de vosso pai para comigo não {é} como anteriormente; porém o Deus de meu pai esteve comigo.
E vós mesmas sabeis que, com todo o meu poder, tenho servido a vosso pai;
mas vosso pai me enganou e mudou o salário dez vezes; porém Deus não lhe permitiu que me fizesse mal.
Quando ele dizia assim: Os salpicados serão o teu salário, então, todos os rebanhos davam salpicados. E, quando ele dizia assim: Os listrados serão o teu salário, então, todos os rebanhos davam listrados.
Assim, Deus tirou o gado de vosso pai e mo deu a mim.
E sucedeu que, ao tempo em que o rebanho concebia, eu levantei os meus olhos e vi em sonhos que os bodes que cobriam as ovelhas {eram} listrados, salpicados e malhados.
E disse-me o Anjo de Deus, em sonhos: Jacó! E eu disse: Eis-me {aqui.}
E disse ele: Levanta, agora, os teus olhos e vê que todos os bodes que cobrem o rebanho {são} listrados, salpicados e malhados; porque tenho visto tudo o que Labão te fez.
Eu {sou} o Deus de Betel, onde tens ungido uma coluna, onde me tens feito o voto; levanta-te agora, sai-te desta terra e torna-te à terra da tua parentela.
Então, responderam Raquel e Léia e disseram-lhe: {Há} ainda para nós parte ou herança na casa de nosso pai?
Não nos considera ele como estranhas? Pois vendeu-nos e comeu todo o nosso dinheiro.
Porque toda a riqueza que Deus tirou de nosso pai é nossa e de nossos filhos; agora, pois, faze tudo o que Deus te tem dito.
Então, se levantou Jacó, pondo os seus filhos e as suas mulheres sobre os camelos,
e levou todo o seu gado e toda a sua fazenda que havia adquirido, o gado que possuía, que alcançara em Padã-Arã, para ir a Isaque, seu pai, à terra de Canaã.
E, havendo Labão ido a tosquiar as suas ovelhas, furtou Raquel os ídolos {Heb. terafim (ver Jz  17-5;  1sm  19-13; os  3-4} que seu pai {tinha.}
E esquivou-se Jacó de Labão, o arameu, {ou siro} porque não lhe fez saber que fugia.
E fugiu ele com tudo o que tinha; e levantou-se, e passou o rio, e pôs o seu rosto para a montanha de Gileade.
E, no terceiro dia, foi anunciado a Labão que Jacó tinha fugido.
Então, tomou consigo os seus irmãos e atrás dele seguiu o seu caminho por sete dias; e alcançou-o na montanha de Gileade.
Veio, porém, Deus a Labão, o arameu, em sonhos, de noite, e disse-lhe: Guarda-te, que não fales a Jacó nem bem nem mal.
Alcançou, pois, Labão a Jacó. E armara Jacó a sua tenda naquela montanha; armou também Labão com os seus irmãos {a sua} na montanha de Gileade.
Então, disse Labão a Jacó: Que fizeste, que te esquivaste de mim e levaste as minhas filhas como cativas pela espada?
Por que fugiste ocultamente, e te esquivaste de mim, e não me fizeste saber, para que eu te enviasse com alegria, e com cânticos, e com tamboril, e com harpa?
Também não me permitiste beijar os meus filhos e as minhas filhas. Loucamente, {pois,} agora andaste, fazendo {assim.}
Poder havia em minha mão para vos fazer mal, mas o Deus de vosso pai me falou ontem à noite, dizendo: Guarda-te, que não fales a Jacó nem bem nem mal.
E agora, se te querias ir {embora,} porquanto tinhas saudades de voltar à casa de teu pai, por que furtaste os meus deuses?
Então, respondeu Jacó e disse a Labão: Porque temia; pois que dizia {comigo} se porventura me não arrebatarias as tuas filhas.
Com quem achares os teus deuses, esse não viva; reconhece diante de nossos irmãos o que {é} teu do que está comigo e toma-o para ti. Pois Jacó não sabia que Raquel os tinha furtado.
Então, entrou Labão na tenda de Jacó, e na tenda de Léia, e na tenda de ambas as servas e não {os} achou; e, saindo da tenda de Léia, entrou na tenda de Raquel.
Mas tinha tomado Raquel os ídolos, e os tinha posto na albarda de um camelo, e assentara-se sobre eles; e apalpou Labão toda a tenda e não {os} achou.
E ela disse a seu pai: Não se acenda a ira nos olhos de meu senhor, que não posso levantar-me diante da tua face; porquanto {tenho} o costume das mulheres. E ele procurou, mas não achou os ídolos.
Então, irou-se Jacó e contendeu com Labão. E respondeu Jacó e disse a Labão: Qual {é} a minha transgressão? Qual {é} o meu pecado, que {tão} furiosamente me tens perseguido?
Havendo apalpado todos os meus móveis, que achaste de todos os móveis da tua casa? Põe-no aqui diante dos meus irmãos e teus irmãos; e {que} julguem entre nós ambos.
Estes vinte anos eu {estive} contigo, as tuas ovelhas e as tuas cabras nunca abortaram, e não comi os carneiros do teu rebanho.
Não te trouxe eu o despedaçado; eu o pagava; o furtado de dia e o furtado de noite da minha mão o requerias.
Estava eu {de sorte que} de dia me consumia o calor, e, de noite, a geada; e o meu sono foi-se dos meus olhos.
Tenho estado agora vinte anos na tua casa; catorze te servi por tuas duas filhas e seis anos por teu rebanho; mas o meu salário tens mudado dez vezes.
Se o Deus de meu pai, o Deus de Abraão e o Temor de Isaque, não fora comigo, por certo me enviarias agora vazio. Deus atendeu à minha aflição e ao trabalho das minhas mãos e repreendeu-{te} ontem à noite.
Então, respondeu Labão e disse a Jacó: {Estas} filhas {são} minhas filhas, e {estes} filhos {são} meus filhos, e {este} rebanho {é} o meu rebanho, e tudo o que vês meu {é;} e que farei, hoje, a estas minhas filhas ou aos filhos que tiveram?
Agora, pois, vem, e façamos concerto, eu e tu, que seja por testemunho entre mim e ti.
Então, tomou Jacó uma pedra e erigiu-a {por} coluna.
E disse Jacó a seus irmãos: Ajuntai pedras. E tomaram pedras, e fizeram um montão, e comeram ali sobre aquele montão.
E chamou-lhe Labão Jegar-Saaduta; {que é, em Aramaico, o montão do testemunho} porém Jacó chamou-lhe Galeede. {que é, em Hebraico, o montão do testemunho}
Então, disse Labão: Este montão {seja,} hoje, por testemunha entre mim e ti; por isso, se chamou o seu nome Galeede
e Mispa, {que significa torre de vigia} porquanto disse: Atente o SENHOR entre mim e ti, quando nós estivermos apartados um do outro.
Se afligires as minhas filhas e se tomares mulheres além das minhas filhas, {mesmo que} ninguém {esteja} conosco, atenta que Deus {é} testemunha entre mim e ti.
Disse mais Labão a Jacó: Eis aqui este mesmo montão, e eis aqui esta coluna que levantei entre mim e ti.
Este montão {seja} testemunha, e esta coluna {seja} testemunha de que eu não passarei este montão para lá e que tu não passarás este montão e esta coluna para cá, para mal.
O Deus de Abraão e o Deus de Naor, o Deus de seu pai, julguem entre nós. E jurou Jacó pelo Temor de Isaque, seu pai.
E sacrificou Jacó um sacrifício na montanha e convidou seus irmãos para comerem pão; e comeram pão e passaram a noite na montanha.
E levantou-se Labão pela manhã, de madrugada, e beijou seus filhos e suas filhas, e abençoou-os; e partiu e voltou Labão ao seu lugar.
E foi {também} Jacó o seu caminho, e encontraram-no os anjos de Deus.
E Jacó disse, quando os viu: Este {é} o exército de Deus. E chamou o nome daquele lugar Maanaim.
E enviou Jacó mensageiros diante da sua face a Esaú, seu irmão, à terra de Seir, território de Edom.
E ordenou-lhes, dizendo: Assim direis a meu senhor Esaú: Assim diz Jacó, teu servo: Como peregrino morei com Labão e me detive {lá} até agora.
E tenho bois, e jumentos, e ovelhas, e servos, e servas; e enviei para o anunciar a meu senhor, para que ache graça a teus olhos.
E os mensageiros tornaram a Jacó, dizendo: Fomos a teu irmão Esaú; e também ele vem a encontrar-te, e quatrocentos varões com ele.
Então, Jacó temeu muito e angustiou-se; e repartiu em dois bandos o povo que com ele estava, e as ovelhas, e as vacas, e os camelos.
Porque dizia: Se Esaú vier a um bando e o ferir, o outro bando escapará.
Disse mais Jacó: Deus de meu pai Abraão e Deus de meu pai Isaque, ó SENHOR, que me disseste: Torna à tua terra e à tua parentela, e far-te-ei bem;
menor sou eu que todas as beneficências e que toda a fidelidade que tiveste com teu servo; porque com meu cajado passei este Jordão e, agora, me tornei em dois bandos.
Livra-me, peço-te, da mão de meu irmão, da mão de Esaú, porque o temo, para que porventura não venha e me fira {e} a mãe com os filhos.
E tu o disseste: Certamente te farei bem e farei a tua semente como a areia do mar, que, pela multidão, não se pode contar.
E passou ali aquela noite; e tomou, do que lhe veio à sua mão, um presente para seu irmão Esaú:
duzentas cabras e vinte bodes; duzentas ovelhas e vinte carneiros;
trinta camelas de leite com suas crias, quarenta vacas e dez novilhos; vinte jumentas e dez jumentinhos.
E deu-o na mão dos seus servos, cada rebanho à parte, e disse a seus servos: Passai adiante da minha face e ponde espaço entre rebanho e rebanho.
E ordenou ao primeiro, dizendo: Quando Esaú, meu irmão, te encontrar e te perguntar, dizendo: De quem {és,} para onde vais, de quem {são} estes diante da tua face?
Então, dirás: São de teu servo Jacó, presente que envia a meu senhor, a Esaú; e eis que ele mesmo vem também atrás de nós.
E ordenou também ao segundo, e ao terceiro, e a todos os que vinham atrás dos rebanhos, dizendo: Conforme esta mesma palavra, falareis a Esaú, quando o achardes.
E direis também: Eis que o teu servo Jacó {vem} atrás de nós. Porque dizia: {Eu} o aplacarei com o presente que vai diante de mim e, depois, verei a sua face; porventura aceitará a minha face.
Assim, passou o presente diante da sua face; ele, porém, passou aquela noite no arraial.
E levantou-se aquela mesma noite, e tomou as suas duas mulheres, e as suas duas servas, e os seus onze filhos, e passou o vau de Jaboque.
E tomou-os e fê-los passar o ribeiro; e fez passar {tudo} o que tinha.
Jacó, porém, ficou só; e lutou com ele um varão, até que a alva subia.
E, vendo que não prevalecia contra ele, tocou a juntura de sua coxa; e se deslocou a juntura da coxa de Jacó, lutando com ele.
E disse: Deixa-me ir, porque já a alva subiu. Porém ele disse: Não te deixarei ir, se me não abençoares.
E disse-lhe: Qual {é} o teu nome? E ele disse: Jacó.
Então, disse: Não se chamará mais o teu nome Jacó, mas Israel, {que significa aquele que luta com Deus} pois, como príncipe, lutaste com Deus e com os homens e prevaleceste.
E Jacó lhe perguntou e disse: Dá-me, peço-te, a saber o teu nome. E disse: Por que perguntas pelo meu nome? E abençoou-o ali.
E chamou Jacó o nome daquele lugar Peniel, {que significa a face de Deus} porque {dizia:} Tenho visto a Deus face a face, e a minha alma foi salva.
E saiu-lhe o sol, quando passou a Peniel; e manquejava da sua coxa.
Por isso, os filhos de Israel não comem o nervo encolhido, que {está} sobre a juntura da coxa, até o dia de hoje, porquanto ele tocara a juntura da coxa de Jacó no nervo encolhido.
E levantou Jacó os olhos e olhou, e eis que vinha Esaú, e quatrocentos homens com ele. Então, repartiu os filhos entre Léia, e Raquel, e as duas servas.
E pôs as servas e seus filhos na frente e a Léia e a seus filhos, atrás; porém a Raquel e José, os derradeiros.
E ele mesmo passou adiante deles e inclinou-se à terra sete vezes, {até} que chegou a seu irmão.
Então, Esaú correu-lhe ao encontro e abraçou-o; e lançou-se sobre o seu pescoço e beijou-o; e choraram.
Depois, levantou os seus olhos, e viu as mulheres e os meninos, e disse: Quem {são} estes contigo? E ele disse: Os filhos que Deus graciosamente tem dado a teu servo.
Então, chegaram as servas, elas e os seus filhos, e inclinaram-se.
E chegou também Léia com seus filhos, e inclinaram-se; e, depois, chegaram José e Raquel e inclinaram-se.
E disse {Esaú:} De que te {serve} todo este bando que tenho encontrado? E ele disse: Para achar graça aos olhos de meu senhor.
Mas Esaú disse: Eu tenho bastante, meu irmão; seja para ti o que tens.
Então, disse Jacó: Não! Se, agora, tenho achado graça a teus olhos, peço-te que tomes o meu presente da minha mão, porquanto tenho visto o teu rosto, como se tivesse visto o rosto de Deus; e tomaste contentamento em mim.
Toma, peço-te, a minha bênção, que te foi trazida; porque Deus graciosamente ma tem dado, e porque tenho de tudo. E instou com ele, até que a tomou.
E disse: Caminhemos, e andemos; e eu partirei adiante de ti.
Porém ele lhe disse: Meu senhor sabe que estes filhos {são} tenros e que tenho comigo ovelhas e vacas de leite; se as afadigarem somente um dia, todo o rebanho morrerá.
Ora, passe o meu senhor diante da face de seu servo; e eu irei como guia pouco a pouco, conforme o passo do gado que está diante da minha face e conforme o passo dos meninos, até que chegue a meu senhor, em Seir.
E Esaú disse: Deixarei logo contigo desta gente que {está} comigo. E ele disse: Para que é isso? {Basta} que eu ache graça aos olhos de meu senhor.
Assim, tornou Esaú aquele dia pelo seu caminho a Seir.
Jacó, porém, partiu para Sucote, e edificou para si uma {ou cabanas} casa, e fez cabanas para o seu gado; por isso, chamou o nome daquele lugar Sucote.
E chegou Jacó salvo à cidade de Siquém, que {está} na terra de Canaã, quando vinha de Padã-Arã; e fez o seu assento diante da cidade.
E comprou uma parte do campo, em que estendera a sua tenda, da mão dos filhos de Hamor, pai de Siquém, por cem peças de dinheiro.
E levantou ali um altar e chamou-lhe Deus, o Deus de Israel.
E saiu Diná, filha de Léia, que esta dera a Jacó, a ver as filhas da terra.
E Siquém, filho de Hamor, heveu, príncipe daquela terra, viu-a, e tomou-a, e deitou-se com ela, e humilhou-a.
E apegou-se a sua alma com Diná, filha de Jacó, e amou a moça, e falou {Heb. falou ao coração da moça} afetuosamente à moça.
Falou também Siquém a Hamor, seu pai, dizendo: Toma-me esta por mulher.
Quando Jacó ouviu que fora contaminada Diná, sua filha, estavam os seus filhos no campo com o gado; e calou-se Jacó até que viessem.
E saiu Hamor, pai de Siquém, a Jacó, para falar com ele.
E vieram os filhos de Jacó do campo; e, ouvindo isso, entristeceram-se os varões e iraram-se muito, pois aquele fizera doidice em Israel, deitando-se com a filha de Jacó, o que não se devia fazer assim.
Então, falou Hamor com eles, dizendo: A alma de Siquém, meu filho, está namorada da vossa filha; dai-lha, peço-vos, por mulher.
Aparentai-vos conosco, dai-nos as vossas filhas e tomai as nossas filhas para vós;
e habitareis conosco; e a terra estará diante da vossa face; habitai, e negociai nela, e tomai possessão nela.
E disse Siquém ao pai dela e aos irmãos dela: Ache eu graça a vossos olhos e darei o que me disserdes.
Aumentai muito sobre mim o dote e a dádiva, e darei o que me disserdes; dai-me somente a moça por mulher.
Então, responderam os filhos de Jacó a Siquém e a Hamor, seu pai, enganosamente, e falaram, porquanto havia contaminado a Diná, sua irmã.
E disseram-lhes: Não podemos fazer isso, que déssemos a nossa irmã a um varão não-circuncidado; porque isso {seria} uma vergonha para nós.
Nisso, porém, consentiremos a vós: se fordes como nós, que se circuncide todo macho entre vós;
então, dar-vos-emos as nossas filhas, e tomaremos nós as vossas filhas, e habitaremos convosco, e seremos um só povo.
Mas, se não nos ouvirdes e não vos circuncidardes, tomaremos a nossa filha e ir-nos-emos.
E suas palavras foram boas aos olhos de Hamor e aos olhos de Siquém, filho de Hamor.
E não tardou o jovem em fazer isto; porque a filha de Jacó lhe agradava, e ele {era} o mais honrado de toda a casa de seu pai.
Vieram, pois, Hamor e Siquém, seu filho, à porta da sua cidade e falaram aos varões da sua cidade, dizendo:
Estes varões {são} pacíficos conosco; portanto, habitarão nesta terra e negociarão nela; eis que a terra é larga de espaço diante da sua face; tomaremos nós as suas filhas por mulheres e lhes daremos as nossas filhas.
Mas somente consentirão aqueles varões habitar conosco, para que sejamos um só povo, se todo macho entre nós se circuncidar, como eles {são} circuncidados.
O seu gado, e as suas possessões, e todos os seus animais não serão nossos? Consintamos somente com eles, e habitarão conosco.
E deram ouvidos a Hamor e a Siquém, seu filho, todos os que saíam da porta da cidade; e foi circuncidado todo macho, de todos os que saíam pela porta da sua cidade.
E aconteceu que, ao terceiro dia, quando estavam com a {mais violenta} dor, dois filhos de Jacó, Simeão e Levi, irmãos de Diná, tomaram cada um a sua espada, e entraram afoitamente na cidade, e mataram todo macho.
Mataram também a fio de espada a Hamor, e a seu filho Siquém; e tomaram Diná da casa de Siquém e saíram.
Vieram os filhos de Jacó aos mortos e saquearam a cidade, porquanto haviam contaminado a sua irmã.
As suas ovelhas, e as suas vacas, e os seus jumentos, e o que na cidade e o que no campo {havia} tomaram;
e toda a sua fazenda, e todos os seus meninos, e as suas mulheres levaram presos e despojaram-nos de tudo o que {havia} em casa.
Então, disse Jacó a Simeão e a Levi: Tendes-me turbado, fazendo-me cheirar mal entre os moradores desta terra, entre os cananeus e ferezeus; {sendo} eu pouco povo em número, ajuntar-se-ão, e ficarei destruído, eu e minha casa.
E eles disseram: Faria, pois, ele a nossa irmã, como a uma prostituta?
Depois, disse Deus a Jacó: Levanta-te, sobe a Betel e habita ali; faze ali um altar ao Deus que te apareceu quando fugiste diante da face de Esaú, teu irmão.
Então, disse Jacó à sua família e a todos os que com ele {estavam:} Tirai os deuses estranhos que há no meio de vós, e purificai-vos, e mudai as vossas vestes.
E levantemo-nos e subamos a Betel; e ali farei um altar ao Deus que me respondeu no dia da minha angústia e {que} foi comigo no caminho que tenho andado.
Então, deram a Jacó todos os deuses estranhos que {tinham} em suas mãos e as arrecadas que {estavam} em suas orelhas; e Jacó os escondeu debaixo do carvalho que {está} junto a Siquém.
E partiram; e o terror de Deus foi sobre as cidades que {estavam} ao redor deles, e não seguiram após os filhos de Jacó.
Assim, chegou Jacó a Luz, que {está} na terra de Canaã (esta {é} Betel), ele e todo o povo que com ele {havia.}
E edificou ali um altar e chamou aquele lugar El-Betel, {que significa o Deus de Betel} porquanto Deus ali se lhe tinha manifestado quando fugia diante da face de seu irmão.
E morreu Débora, a ama de Rebeca, e foi sepultada ao pé de Betel, debaixo do carvalho cujo nome chamou Alom-Bacute. {que significa o carvalho de pranto}
E apareceu Deus outra vez a Jacó, vindo de Padã-Arã, e abençoou-o.
E disse-lhe Deus: O teu nome {é} Jacó; não se chamará mais o teu nome Jacó, mas Israel será o teu nome. E chamou o seu nome Israel.
Disse-lhe mais Deus: Eu {sou} o Deus Todo-poderoso; frutifica e multiplica-te; uma nação e multidão de nações sairão de ti, e reis procederão de ti.
E te darei a ti a terra que tenho dado a Abraão e a Isaque e à tua semente depois de ti darei a terra.
E Deus subiu dele, do lugar onde falara com ele.
E Jacó pôs uma coluna no lugar onde falara com ele, uma coluna de pedra; e derramou sobre ela uma libação e deitou sobre ela azeite.
E chamou Jacó o nome daquele lugar, onde Deus falara com ele, Betel.
Partiram de Betel, e, havendo ainda um pequeno espaço de terra para chegar a Efrata, teve um filho Raquel e teve trabalho em seu parto.
E aconteceu que, tendo ela trabalho em seu parto, lhe disse a parteira: Não temas, porque também este filho terás.
E aconteceu que, saindo-se-lhe a alma (porque morreu), chamou o seu nome Benoni; {que significa filho de minha dor} mas seu pai o chamou Benjamim. {que significa filho da destra}
Assim, morreu Raquel e foi sepultada no caminho de Efrata; esta {é} Belém.
E Jacó pôs uma coluna sobre a sua sepultura; esta {é} a coluna da sepultura de Raquel até o dia de hoje.
Então, partiu Israel e estendeu a sua tenda além de Migdal-Éder. {ou a torre de Éder}
E aconteceu que, habitando Israel naquela terra, foi Rúben e deitou-se com Bila, concubina de seu pai; e Israel soube-o. E eram doze os filhos de Jacó:
os filhos de Léia: Rúben, o primogênito de Jacó, depois Simeão e Levi, Judá, Issacar e Zebulom;
os filhos de Raquel: José e Benjamim;
os filhos de Bila, serva de Raquel: Dã e Naftali;
os filhos de Zilpa, serva de Léia: Gade e Aser. Estes {são} os filhos de Jacó, que lhe nasceram em Padã-Arã.
E Jacó veio a Isaque, seu pai, a Manre, a Quiriate-Arba (que {é} Hebrom), onde peregrinaram Abraão e Isaque.
E foram os dias de Isaque cento e oitenta anos.
E Isaque expirou, e morreu, e foi recolhido aos seus povos, velho e farto de dias; e Esaú e Jacó, seus filhos, o sepultaram.
E estas {são} as gerações de Esaú (que {é} Edom).
Esaú tomou suas mulheres das filhas de Canaã: Ada, filha de Elom, heteu; Oolibama, filha de Aná, filho de Zibeão, heveu;
e Basemate, filha de Ismael, irmã de Nebaiote.
E Ada teve de Esaú a Elifaz; e Basemate teve a Reuel;
e Oolibama teve a Jeús, e Jalão, e Corá; estes {são} os filhos de Esaú, que lhe nasceram na terra de Canaã.
E Esaú tomou suas mulheres, e seus filhos, e suas filhas, e todas as almas de sua casa, e seu gado, e todos os seus animais, e toda a sua fazenda, que havia adquirido na terra de Canaã; e foi-se a {outra} terra de diante da face de Jacó, seu irmão.
Porque a fazenda deles era muita para habitarem juntos; e a terra de suas peregrinações não os podia sustentar por causa de seu gado.
Portanto, Esaú habitou na montanha de Seir; Esaú é Edom.
Estas, pois, {são} as gerações de Esaú, pai dos edomitas, na montanha de Seir.
Estes {são} os nomes dos filhos de Esaú: Elifaz, filho de Ada, mulher de Esaú; Reuel, filho de Basemate, mulher de Esaú.
E os filhos de Elifaz foram: Temã, Omar, Zefô, Gaetã e Quenaz.
E Timna era concubina de Elifaz, filho de Esaú, e teve de Elifaz a Amaleque; estes {são} os filhos de Ada, mulher de Esaú.
E estes {foram} os filhos de Reuel: Naate, Zerá, Samá e Mizá; estes foram os filhos de Basemate, mulher de Esaú.
E estes foram os filhos de Oolibama, filha de Aná, filho de Zibeão, mulher de Esaú; e deu a Esaú: Jeús, Jalão e Corá.
Estes {são} os príncipes dos filhos de Esaú; os filhos de Elifaz, o primogênito de Esaú, {foram:} o príncipe Temã, o príncipe Omar, o príncipe Zefô, o príncipe Quenaz,
o príncipe Corá, o príncipe Gaetã, o príncipe Amaleque; estes são os príncipes de Elifaz, na terra de Edom; estes {são} os filhos de Ada.
E estes {são} os filhos de Reuel, filho de Esaú: o príncipe Naate, o príncipe Zerá, o príncipe Samá, o príncipe Mizá; estes são os príncipes de Reuel, na terra de Edom; estes {são} os filhos de Basemate, mulher de Esaú.
E estes {são} os filhos de Oolibama, mulher de Esaú: o príncipe Jeús, o príncipe Jalão, o príncipe Corá; estes {são} os príncipes de Oolibama, filha de Aná e mulher de Esaú.
Estes {são} os filhos de Esaú, e estes {são} seus príncipes; ele {é} Edom.
Estes {são} os filhos de Seir, horeu, moradores daquela terra: Lotã, Sobal, Zibeão, Aná,
Disom, Eser e Disã; estes {são} os príncipes dos horeus, filhos de Seir, na terra de Edom.
E os filhos de Lotã foram: Hori e Homã; e a irmã de Lotã {era} Timna.
Estes {são} os filhos de Sobal: Alvã, Manaate, Ebal, Sefô e Onã.
E estes {são} os filhos de Zibeão: Aiá e Aná; este {é} o Aná que achou as caldas no deserto, quando apascentava os jumentos de Zibeão, seu pai.
E estes {são} os filhos de Aná: Disom e Oolibama, a filha de Aná.
E estes {são} os filhos de Disom: Hendã, Esbã, Itrã e Querã.
Estes {são} os filhos de Eser: Bilã, Zaavã e Acã.
Estes {são} os filhos de Disã: Uz e Arã.
Estes {são} os príncipes dos horeus: o príncipe Lotã, o príncipe Sobal, o príncipe Zibeão, o príncipe Aná,
o príncipe Disom, o príncipe Eser, o príncipe Disã; estes {são} os príncipes dos horeus, segundo seus príncipes, na terra de Seir.
E estes {são} os reis que reinaram na terra de Edom, antes que reinasse rei {algum} sobre os filhos de Israel.
Reinou, pois, em Edom Belá, filho de Beor, e o nome da sua cidade {foi} Dinabá.
E morreu Belá; e Jobabe, filho de Zerá, de Bozra, reinou em seu lugar.
E morreu Jobabe; e Husão, da terra dos temanitas, reinou em seu lugar.
E morreu Husão, e em seu lugar reinou Hadade, filho de Bedade, o que feriu a Midiã no campo de Moabe; e o nome da sua cidade {foi} Avite.
E morreu Hadade; e Samlá, de Masreca, reinou em seu lugar.
E morreu Samlá; e Saul, de Reobote do rio, reinou em seu lugar.
E morreu Saul; e Baal-Hanã, filho de Acbor, reinou em seu lugar.
E morreu Baal-Hanã, filho de Acbor; e Hadar reinou em seu lugar; o nome da sua cidade {foi} Paú; e o nome de sua mulher {foi} Meetabel, filha de Matrede, filha de Me-Zaabe.
E estes {são} os nomes dos príncipes de Esaú, segundo as suas gerações, segundo os seus lugares, pelos seus nomes: o príncipe Timna, o príncipe Alva, o príncipe Jetete,
o príncipe Oolibama, o príncipe Elá, o príncipe Pinom,
o príncipe Quenaz, o príncipe Temã, o príncipe Mibzar,
o príncipe Magdiel, o príncipe Irã; estes {são} os príncipes de Edom, segundo as suas habitações, na terra da sua possessão; este {é} Esaú, pai de Edom.
E Jacó habitou na terra das peregrinações de seu pai, na terra de Canaã.
Estas {são} as gerações de Jacó: {Sendo} José de dezessete anos, apascentava as ovelhas com seus irmãos; e {estava} este jovem com os filhos de Bila e com os filhos de Zilpa, mulheres de seu pai; e José trazia uma má fama deles a seu pai.
E Israel amava a José mais do que a todos os seus filhos, porque {era} filho da sua velhice; e fez-lhe uma túnica de {várias} cores.
Vendo, pois, seus irmãos que seu pai o amava mais do que a todos os seus irmãos, aborreceram-no e não podiam falar com ele pacificamente.
Sonhou também José um sonho, que contou a seus irmãos; por isso, o aborreciam ainda mais.
E disse-lhes: Ouvi, peço-vos, este sonho, que tenho sonhado:
Eis que {estávamos} atando molhos no meio do campo, e eis que o meu molho se levantava e também ficava em pé; e eis que os vossos molhos o rodeavam e se inclinavam ao meu molho.
Então, lhe disseram seus irmãos: Tu, pois, deveras reinarás sobre nós? Tu deveras terás domínio sobre nós? Por isso, tanto mais o aborreciam por seus sonhos e por suas palavras.
E sonhou ainda outro sonho, e o contou a seus irmãos, e disse: Eis que ainda sonhei um sonho; e eis que o sol, e a lua, e onze estrelas se inclinavam a mim.
E, contando-o a seu pai e a seus irmãos, repreendeu-o seu pai e disse-lhe: Que sonho {é} este que sonhaste? Porventura viremos eu, e tua mãe, e teus irmãos a inclinar-nos perante ti em terra?
Seus irmãos, pois, o invejavam; seu pai, porém, guardava este negócio {no seu coração.}
E seus irmãos foram apascentar o rebanho de seu pai, junto de Siquém.
Disse, pois, Israel a José: Não apascentam os teus irmãos junto de Siquém? Vem, e enviar-te-ei a eles. E ele lhe disse: Eis-me {aqui.}
E ele lhe disse: Ora, vai, e vê como estão teus irmãos e como está o rebanho, e traze-me resposta. Assim, o enviou do vale de Hebrom, e José veio a Siquém.
E achou-o um varão, porque ele andava errado pelo campo, e perguntou-lhe o varão, dizendo: Que procuras?
E ele disse: Procuro meus irmãos; dize-me, peço-te, onde eles apascentam.
E disse aquele varão: Foram-se daqui, porque ouvi-lhes dizer: Vamos a Dotã. José, pois, seguiu seus irmãos e achou-os em Dotã.
E viram-no de longe e, antes que chegasse a eles, conspiraram contra ele, para o matarem.
E disseram uns aos outros: Eis lá vem o sonhador-mor!
Vinde, pois, agora, e matemo-lo, e lancemo-lo numa destas covas, e diremos: Uma besta-fera o comeu; e veremos que será dos seus sonhos.
E, ouvindo-o Rúben, livrou-o das suas mãos e disse: Não lhe tiremos a vida.
Também lhes disse Rúben: Não derrameis sangue; lançai-o nesta cova que {está} no deserto e não lanceis mãos nele; para livrá-lo das suas mãos e para torná-lo a seu pai.
E aconteceu que, chegando José a seus irmãos, tiraram a José a sua túnica, a túnica de {várias} cores que trazia.
E tomaram-no e lançaram-no na cova; porém a cova {estava} vazia, não {havia} água nela.
Depois, assentaram-se a comer pão, e levantaram os olhos, e olharam, e eis que uma companhia de ismaelitas vinha de Gileade; e seus camelos traziam especiarias, e bálsamo, e mirra; e iam levar isso ao Egito.
Então, Judá disse aos seus irmãos: Que proveito {haverá} em que matemos a nosso irmão e escondamos a {Heb. o seu sangue} sua morte?
Vinde, e vendamo-lo a estes ismaelitas; e não seja nossa mão sobre ele, porque ele é nosso irmão, nossa carne. E seus irmãos obedeceram.
Passando, pois, os mercadores midianitas, tiraram, e alçaram a José da cova, e venderam José por vinte {moedas} de prata aos ismaelitas, os quais levaram José ao Egito.
Tornando, pois, Rúben à cova, eis que José não {estava} na cova; então, rasgou as suas vestes,
e tornou a seus irmãos, e disse: O moço não {aparece;} e, eu, aonde irei?
Então, tomaram a túnica de José, e mataram um cabrito, e tingiram a túnica no sangue.
E enviaram a túnica de {várias} cores, e fizeram levá-la a seu pai, e disseram: Temos achado esta {túnica;} conhece agora se esta {será} ou não a túnica de teu filho.
E conheceu-a e disse: É a túnica de meu filho; uma besta-fera o comeu, certamente foi despedaçado José.
Então, Jacó rasgou as suas vestes, e pôs pano de saco sobre os seus lombos, e lamentou a seu filho muitos dias.
E levantaram-se todos os seus filhos e todas as suas filhas, para o consolarem; recusou, porém, ser consolado e disse: Na verdade, com choro hei de descer ao meu filho até à sepultura. Assim, o chorou seu pai.
E os midianitas venderam-no no Egito a Potifar, eunuco {ou oficial} de Faraó, capitão da guarda.
E aconteceu, no mesmo tempo, que Judá desceu de entre seus irmãos e entrou {na casa de} um varão de Adulão, cujo nome {era} Hira.
E viu Judá ali a filha de um varão cananeu, cujo nome {era} Sua; e tomou-a e entrou a ela.
E ela concebeu e teve um filho; e chamou o seu nome Er.
E tornou a conceber, e teve um filho, e chamou o seu nome Onã.
E continuou ainda, e teve um filho, e chamou o seu nome Selá; e ele estava em Quezibe quando ela o teve.
Judá, pois, tomou uma mulher para Er, o seu primogênito; e o seu nome {era} Tamar.
Er, porém, o primogênito de Judá, era mau aos olhos do SENHOR, pelo que o SENHOR o matou.
Então, disse Judá a Onã: Entra à mulher do teu irmão, e casa-te com ela, e suscita semente a teu irmão.
Onã, porém, soube que essa semente não havia de ser para ele; e aconteceu que, quando entrava à mulher de seu irmão, derramava-{a} na terra, para não dar semente a seu irmão.
E o que fazia era mau aos olhos do SENHOR, pelo que também o matou.
Então, disse Judá a Tamar, sua nora: Fica-te viúva na casa de teu pai, até que Selá, meu filho, seja grande. Porquanto disse: Para que, porventura, não morra também este, como seus irmãos. Assim, foi-se Tamar e ficou-se na casa de seu pai.
Passando-se, pois, muitos dias, morreu a filha de Sua, mulher de Judá; e, depois, se consolou Judá e subiu aos tosquiadores das suas ovelhas, em Timna, ele e Hira, seu amigo, o adulamita.
E deram aviso a Tamar, dizendo: Eis que teu sogro sobe a Timna, a tosquiar as suas ovelhas.
Então, ela tirou de sobre si as vestes da sua viuvez, e cobriu-se com o véu, e disfarçou-se, e assentou-se à {ou na porta de Enaim} entrada das duas fontes que {estão} no caminho de Timna; porque via que Selá já era grande, e ela lhe não fora dada por mulher.
E, vendo-a Judá, teve-a por uma prostituta; porque ela havia coberto o seu rosto.
E dirigiu-se para ela no caminho e disse: Vem, peço-te, deixa-me entrar a ti. Porquanto não sabia que {era} sua nora; e ela disse: Que darás, para que entres a mim?
E ele disse: Eu {te} enviarei um cabrito do rebanho. E ela disse: Dás-me penhor até que o envies?
Então, ele disse: Que penhor é que te darei? E ela disse: O teu selo, e o teu lenço, {ou cordão} e o cajado que {está} em tua mão. O que ele lhe deu, e entrou a ela; e ela concebeu dele.
E ela levantou-se, e foi-se, e tirou de sobre si o seu véu, e vestiu as vestes da sua viuvez.
E Judá enviou o cabrito por mão do seu amigo, o adulamita, para tomar o penhor da mão da mulher; porém não a achou.
E perguntou aos homens daquele lugar, dizendo: Onde {está} a prostituta que {estava} no caminho junto às duas fontes? E disseram: Aqui não esteve prostituta {alguma.}
E voltou a Judá e disse: Não a achei; e também disseram os homens daquele lugar: Aqui não esteve prostituta.
Então, disse Judá: Tome-{o} ela, para que porventura não venhamos {a cair} em desprezo; eis que tenho enviado este cabrito, mas tu não a achaste.
E aconteceu que, quase três meses depois, deram aviso a Judá, dizendo: Tamar, tua nora, adulterou e eis que {está} pejada do adultério. Então, disse Judá: Tirai-a fora para que seja queimada.
E, tirando-a fora, ela mandou dizer a seu sogro: Do varão de quem {são estas} coisas eu concebi. E ela disse mais: Conhece, peço-te, de quem {é} este selo, e estes lenços, {ou cordões} e este cajado.
E conheceu-os Judá e disse: Mais justa é {ela} do que eu, porquanto não a tenho dado a Selá, meu filho. E nunca mais a conheceu.
E aconteceu, ao tempo de dar à luz, que {havia} gêmeos em seu ventre.
E aconteceu, dando à luz, que {um} pôs fora a mão, e a parteira tomou-a e atou em sua mão um {fio} roxo, dizendo: Este saiu primeiro.
Mas aconteceu que, tornando ele a recolher a sua mão, eis que saiu o seu irmão; e ela disse: Como tens tu rompido? Sobre ti é a rotura. E chamaram o seu nome Perez.
E depois saiu o seu irmão, em cuja mão estava o {fio} roxo; e chamaram o seu nome Zerá.
E José foi levado ao Egito, e Potifar, eunuco {ou oficial} de Faraó, capitão da guarda, varão egípcio, comprou-o da mão dos ismaelitas que o tinham levado lá.
E o SENHOR estava com José, e foi varão próspero; e estava na casa de seu senhor egípcio.
Vendo, pois, o seu senhor que o SENHOR {estava} com ele e que tudo o que ele fazia o SENHOR prosperava em sua mão,
José achou graça a seus olhos e servia-o; e ele o pôs sobre a sua casa e entregou na sua mão tudo o que tinha.
E aconteceu que, desde que o pusera sobre a sua casa e sobre tudo o que tinha, o SENHOR abençoou a casa do egípcio por amor de José; e a bênção do SENHOR foi sobre tudo o que tinha, na casa e no campo.
E deixou tudo o que tinha na mão de José, de maneira que de nada sabia {do que estava} com ele, a não ser do pão que comia. E José era formoso de aparência e formoso à vista.
E aconteceu, depois destas coisas, que a mulher de seu senhor pôs os olhos em José e disse: Deita-te comigo.
Porém ele recusou e disse à mulher do seu senhor: Eis que o meu senhor não sabe do que há em casa comigo e entregou em minha mão tudo o que tem.
Ninguém {há} maior do que eu nesta casa, e nenhuma coisa me vedou, senão a ti, porquanto tu {és} sua mulher; como, pois, faria eu este tamanho mal e pecaria contra Deus?
E aconteceu que, falando ela cada dia a José, e não lhe dando ele ouvidos para deitar-se com ela {e} estar com ela,
sucedeu, num certo dia, que veio à casa para fazer o seu serviço; e nenhum dos da casa {estava} ali.
E ela lhe pegou pela sua veste, dizendo: Deita-te comigo. E ele deixou a sua veste na mão dela, e fugiu, e saiu para fora.
E aconteceu que, vendo ela que deixara a sua veste em sua mão e fugira para fora,
chamou os homens de sua casa e falou-lhes, dizendo: Vede, trouxe-nos o varão hebreu para escarnecer de nós; entrou até mim para deitar-se comigo, e eu gritei com grande voz.
E aconteceu que, ouvindo ele que eu levantava a minha voz e gritava, deixou a sua veste comigo, e fugiu, e saiu para fora.
E ela pôs a sua veste perto de si, até que o seu senhor veio à sua casa.
Então, falou-lhe conforme as mesmas palavras, dizendo: Veio a mim o servo hebreu, que nos trouxeste para escarnecer de mim.
E aconteceu que, levantando eu a minha voz e gritando, ele deixou a sua veste comigo e fugiu para fora.
E aconteceu que, ouvindo o seu senhor as palavras de sua mulher, que lhe falava, dizendo: Conforme estas mesmas palavras me fez teu servo, a sua ira se acendeu.
E o senhor de José o tomou e o entregou na casa do cárcere, no lugar onde os presos do rei {estavam} presos; assim, esteve ali na casa do cárcere.
O SENHOR, porém, estava com José, e estendeu sobre ele a sua benignidade, e deu-lhe graça aos olhos do carcereiro-mor.
E o carcereiro-mor entregou na mão de José todos os presos que {estavam} na casa do cárcere; e ele fazia tudo o que se fazia ali.
E o carcereiro-mor não teve cuidado de nenhuma coisa {que estava} na mão dele, porquanto o SENHOR estava com ele; e {tudo} o que ele fazia o SENHOR prosperava.
E aconteceu, depois destas coisas, que pecaram o copeiro do rei do Egito e o padeiro contra o seu senhor, o rei do Egito.
E indignou-se Faraó muito contra os seus dois eunucos, contra o copeiro-mor e contra o padeiro-mor.
E entregou-os à prisão, na casa do capitão da guarda, na casa do cárcere, no lugar onde José {estava preso.}
E o capitão da guarda pô-los a cargo de José, para que os servisse; e estiveram {muitos} dias na prisão.
E ambos sonharam um sonho, cada um seu sonho na mesma noite; cada um conforme a interpretação do seu sonho, o copeiro e o padeiro do rei do Egito, que {estavam} presos na casa do cárcere.
E veio José a eles pela manhã e olhou para eles, e eis que {estavam} turbados.
Então, perguntou aos eunucos de Faraó, que com ele {estavam} no cárcere da casa de seu senhor, dizendo: Por que {estão,} hoje, tristes os vossos semblantes?
E eles lhe disseram: Temos sonhado um sonho, e ninguém {há} que o interprete. E José disse-lhes: Não {são} de Deus as interpretações? Contai-mo, peço-vos.
Então, contou o copeiro-mor o seu sonho a José e disse-lhe: Eis que em meu sonho {havia} uma vide diante da minha face.
E, na vide, três sarmentos, e ela estava como que brotando; a sua flor saía, e os seus cachos amadureciam em uvas.
E o copo de Faraó {estava} na minha mão; e eu tomava as uvas, e as espremia no copo de Faraó, e dava o copo na mão de Faraó.
Então, disse-lhe José: Esta {é} a sua interpretação: os três sarmentos {são} três dias;
dentro ainda de três dias, Faraó levantará a tua cabeça e te restaurará ao teu estado, e darás o copo de Faraó na sua mão, conforme o costume antigo, quando eras seu copeiro.
Porém lembra-te de mim, quando te for bem; e rogo-te que uses comigo de compaixão, e que faças menção de mim a Faraó, e faze-me sair desta casa;
porque, de fato, fui roubado da terra dos hebreus; e tampouco aqui nada tenho feito, para que me pusessem nesta cova.
Vendo, então, o padeiro-mor que tinha interpretado bem, disse a José: Eu também sonhava, e eis que três cestos {ou cestos de pão branco} brancos estavam sobre a minha cabeça;
e, no cesto mais alto, {havia} de todos os manjares de Faraó, obra de padeiro; e as aves os comiam do cesto de sobre a minha cabeça.
Então, respondeu José e disse: Esta é {a} sua interpretação: os três cestos são três dias;
dentro ainda de três dias, Faraó levantará a tua cabeça sobre ti e te pendurará num madeiro, e as aves comerão a tua carne de sobre ti.
E aconteceu, ao terceiro dia, o dia do nascimento de Faraó, que fez um banquete a todos os seus servos; e levantou a cabeça do copeiro-mor e a cabeça do padeiro-mor, no meio dos seus servos.
E fez tornar o copeiro-mor ao seu ofício de copeiro, e este deu o copo na mão de Faraó.
Mas ao padeiro-mor enforcou, como José havia interpretado.
O copeiro-mor, porém, não se lembrou de José; antes, se esqueceu dele.
E aconteceu que, ao fim de dois anos inteiros, Faraó sonhou e eis que estava em pé junto ao rio.
E eis que subiam do rio sete vacas, formosas à vista e gordas de carne, e pastavam no prado.
E eis que subiam do rio após elas outras sete vacas, feias à vista e magras de carne, e paravam junto às {outras} vacas na praia do rio.
E as vacas feias à vista e magras de carne comiam as sete vacas formosas à vista e gordas. Então, acordou Faraó.
Depois, dormiu e sonhou outra vez, e eis que brotavam de um mesmo pé sete espigas cheias e boas.
E eis que sete espigas miúdas e queimadas do vento oriental brotavam após elas.
E as espigas miúdas devoravam as sete espigas grandes e cheias. Então, acordou Faraó, e eis que {era um} sonho.
E aconteceu que, pela manhã, o seu espírito perturbou-se, e enviou e chamou todos os adivinhadores do Egito e todos os seus sábios; e Faraó contou-lhes os seus sonhos, mas ninguém {havia} que os interpretasse a Faraó.
Então, falou o copeiro-mor a Faraó, dizendo: Dos meus pecados me lembro hoje.
Estando Faraó mui indignado contra os seus servos e pondo-me sob prisão na casa da guarda, a mim e ao padeiro-mor,
então, sonhamos um sonho na mesma noite, eu e ele, cada um conforme a interpretação do seu sonho sonhamos.
E {estava} ali conosco um jovem hebreu, servo do capitão da guarda, e contamos-lhos, e interpretou-nos os nossos sonhos, a cada um interpretou conforme o seu sonho.
E como ele nos interpretou, assim {mesmo} foi feito: a mim me fez tornar ao meu estado, e a ele fez enforcar.
Então, enviou Faraó e chamou a José, e o fizeram sair logo da cova; e barbeou-se, e mudou as suas vestes, e veio a Faraó.
E Faraó disse a José: Eu sonhei um sonho, e ninguém {há} que o interprete; mas de ti ouvi dizer {que, quando} ouves um sonho, o interpretas.
E respondeu José a Faraó, dizendo: Isso não está em mim; Deus dará resposta de paz a Faraó.
Então, disse Faraó a José: Eis que em meu sonho estava eu em pé na praia do rio.
E eis que subiam do rio sete vacas gordas de carne e formosas à vista e pastavam no prado.
E eis que outras sete vacas subiam após estas, muito feias à vista e magras de carne; não tenho visto outras tais, quanto à fealdade, em toda a terra do Egito.
E as vacas magras e feias comiam as primeiras sete vacas gordas;
e entravam em suas entranhas, mas não se conhecia que houvessem entrado em suas entranhas, porque o seu aspecto {era} feio como no princípio. Então, acordei.
Depois, vi em meu sonho, e eis que de um mesmo pé subiam sete espigas cheias e boas.
E eis que sete espigas secas, miúdas {e} queimadas do vento oriental brotavam após elas.
E as sete espigas miúdas devoravam as sete espigas boas. E eu disse-o aos magos, mas ninguém {houve} que mo interpretasse.
Então, disse José a Faraó: O sonho de Faraó {é} um só; o que Deus há de fazer, notificou-o a Faraó.
As sete vacas formosas {são} sete anos; as sete espigas formosas também {são} sete anos; o sonho é um só.
E as sete vacas magras e feias à vista, que subiam depois delas, {são} sete anos, como as sete espigas miúdas e queimadas do vento oriental; serão sete anos de fome.
Esta {é} a palavra que tenho dito a Faraó; o que Deus há de fazer, mostrou-o a Faraó.
E eis que vêm sete anos, e haverá grande fartura em toda a terra do Egito.
E, depois deles, levantar-se-ão sete anos de fome, e toda aquela fartura será esquecida na terra do Egito, e a fome consumirá a terra;
e não será conhecida a abundância na terra, por causa daquela fome {que haverá} depois, porquanto será gravíssima.
E o sonho foi duplicado duas vezes a Faraó é porque esta coisa é determinada de Deus, e Deus se apressa a fazê-la.
Portanto, Faraó se proveja agora de um varão inteligente e sábio e o ponha sobre a terra do Egito.
Faça {isso} Faraó, e ponha governadores sobre a terra, e tome a quinta parte da terra do Egito nos sete anos de fartura.
E ajuntem toda a comida destes bons anos, que vêm, e amontoem trigo debaixo da mão de Faraó, para mantimento nas cidades, e o guardem.
Assim, será o mantimento para provimento da terra, para os sete anos de fome que haverá na terra do Egito; para que a terra não pereça de fome.
E esta palavra foi boa aos olhos de Faraó e aos olhos de todos os seus servos.
E disse Faraó a seus servos: Acharíamos um varão como este, em quem {haja} o Espírito de Deus?
Depois, disse Faraó a José: Pois que Deus te fez saber tudo isto, ninguém {há tão} inteligente e sábio como tu.
Tu estarás sobre a minha casa, e por tua boca se governará todo o meu povo; somente no trono eu serei maior que tu.
Disse mais Faraó a José: Vês aqui te tenho posto sobre toda a terra do Egito.
E tirou Faraó o anel da sua mão, e o pôs na mão de José, e o fez vestir de vestes de linho fino, e pôs um colar de ouro no seu pescoço.
E o fez subir no segundo carro que tinha, e clamavam diante dele: Ajoelhai. Assim, o pôs sobre toda a terra do Egito.
E disse Faraó a José: Eu {sou} Faraó; porém sem ti ninguém levantará a sua mão ou o seu pé em toda a terra do Egito.
E chamou Faraó o nome de José Zafenate-Panéia {que significa salvador do mundo} e deu-lhe por mulher a Asenate, filha de Potífera, sacerdote de Om; e saiu José por {toda} a terra do Egito.
E José {era} da idade de trinta anos quando esteve diante da face de Faraó, rei do Egito. E saiu José da face de Faraó e passou por toda a terra do Egito.
E a terra produziu nos sete anos de fartura a mãos-cheias.
E ajuntou todo o mantimento dos sete anos que houve na terra do Egito; e guardou o mantimento nas cidades, pondo nas cidades o mantimento do campo que {estava} ao redor de cada cidade.
Assim, ajuntou José muitíssimo trigo, como a areia do mar, até que cessou de contar, porquanto não {havia} numeração.
E nasceram a José dois filhos (antes que viesse o ano de fome), que lhe deu Asenate, filha de Potífera, sacerdote de Om.
E chamou José o nome do primogênito Manassés, {que significa que faz esquecer} porque {disse:} Deus me fez esquecer de todo o meu trabalho e de toda a casa de meu pai.
E o nome do segundo chamou Efraim, {que significa duplamente frutífero} porque {disse:} Deus me fez crescer na terra da minha aflição.
Então, acabaram-se os sete anos de fartura que havia na terra do Egito,
e começaram a vir os sete anos de fome, como José tinha dito; e havia fome em todas as terras, mas em toda a terra do Egito havia pão.
E, tendo toda a terra do Egito fome, clamou o povo a Faraó por pão; e Faraó disse a todos os egípcios: Ide a José; o que ele vos disser fazei.
Havendo, pois, fome sobre toda a terra, abriu José tudo em que havia {mantimento} e vendeu aos egípcios; porque a fome prevaleceu na terra do Egito.
E todas as terras vinham ao Egito, para comprar de José, porquanto a fome prevaleceu em todas as terras.
Vendo, então, Jacó que havia mantimento no Egito, disse Jacó a seus filhos: Por que estais olhando uns para os outros?
Disse mais: Eis que tenho ouvido que há mantimento no Egito; descei até lá e comprai-nos trigo, para que vivamos e não morramos.
Então, desceram os dez irmãos de José, para comprarem trigo no Egito.
A Benjamim, porém, irmão de José, não enviou Jacó com os seus irmãos, porque dizia: Para que lhe não suceda, porventura, algum desastre.
Assim, vieram os filhos de Israel para comprar, entre os que vinham {lá;} porque havia fome na terra de Canaã.
José, pois, era o governador daquela terra; ele vendia a todo o povo da terra; e os irmãos de José vieram e inclinaram-se ante ele com a face na terra.
E José, vendo os seus irmãos, conheceu-os; porém mostrou-se estranho para com eles, e falou com eles asperamente, e disse-lhes: Donde vindes? E eles disseram: Da terra de Canaã, para comprarmos mantimento.
José, pois, conheceu os seus irmãos; mas eles não o conheceram.
Então, José lembrou-se dos sonhos que havia sonhado deles e disse-lhes: Vós sois espias {e} viestes para ver a nudez da terra.
E eles lhe disseram: Não, senhor meu; mas teus servos vieram a comprar mantimento.
Todos nós somos filhos de um varão; somos homens de retidão; os teus servos não são espias.
E ele lhes disse: Não; antes, viestes para ver a nudez da terra.
E eles disseram: Nós, teus servos, {somos} doze irmãos, filhos de um varão da terra de Canaã; e eis que o mais novo está com nosso pai, hoje; mas um já não existe.
Então, lhes disse José: Isso {é} o que vos tenho dito, dizendo que {sois} espias.
Nisto sereis provados: pela vida de Faraó, não saireis daqui senão quando vosso irmão mais novo vier aqui.
Enviai um dentre vós, que traga vosso irmão; mas vós ficareis presos, e vossas palavras serão provadas, se {há} verdade convosco; e, se não, pela vida de Faraó, vós sois espias.
E pô-los juntos em guarda três dias.
E, ao terceiro dia, disse-lhes José: Fazei isso e vivereis, {porque} eu temo a Deus.
Se sois homens de retidão, que fique um de vossos irmãos preso na casa de vossa prisão; e, vós, ide, levai trigo para a fome de vossa casa.
E trazei-me o vosso irmão mais novo, e serão verificadas vossas palavras, e não morrereis. E eles assim fizeram.
Então, disseram uns aos outros: Na verdade, {somos} culpados acerca de nosso irmão, pois vimos a angústia de sua alma, quando nos rogava; nós, porém, não ouvimos; por isso, vem sobre nós esta angústia.
E Rúben respondeu-lhes, dizendo: Não vo-lo dizia eu, dizendo: Não pequeis contra o moço? Mas não ouvistes; e, vedes aqui, o seu sangue também é requerido.
E eles não sabiam que José os entendia, porque {havia} intérprete entre eles.
E retirou-se deles e chorou. Depois, tornou a eles, falou-lhes, tomou a Simeão dentre eles e amarrou-o perante os seus olhos.
E ordenou José que enchessem os seus sacos de trigo, e que {lhes} restituíssem o seu dinheiro, a cada um no seu saco, e lhes dessem comida para o caminho; e fizeram-lhes assim.
E carregaram o seu trigo sobre os seus jumentos e partiram dali.
E, abrindo um {deles} o seu saco, para dar pasto ao seu jumento na venda, viu o seu dinheiro; porque eis que estava na boca do seu saco.
E disse a seus irmãos: Devolveram o meu dinheiro, e ei-lo mesmo aqui no meu saco. Então, lhes desfaleceu o coração, e pasmavam, dizendo um ao outro: Que é isto que Deus nos tem feito?
E vieram para Jacó, seu pai, na terra de Canaã; e contaram-lhe tudo o que lhes aconteceu, dizendo:
O varão, o senhor da terra, falou conosco asperamente e tratou-nos como espias da terra.
Mas dissemos-lhe: Somos {homens} de retidão; não somos espias;
{somos} doze irmãos, filhos de nosso pai; um não {é mais,} e o mais novo {está} hoje com nosso pai na terra de Canaã.
E aquele varão, o senhor da terra, nos disse: Nisto conhecerei que vós sois {homens} de retidão: deixai comigo um de vossos irmãos, e tomai para a fome de vossas casas, e parti;
e trazei-me vosso irmão mais novo; assim, saberei que não sois espias, mas {homens} de retidão; {então,} vos darei o vosso irmão, e negociareis na terra.
E aconteceu que, despejando eles os seus sacos, eis que cada um tinha a trouxinha com seu dinheiro no seu saco; e viram as trouxinhas com seu dinheiro, eles e seu pai, e temeram.
Então, Jacó, seu pai, disse-lhes: Tendes-me desfilhado: José já não existe, e Simeão não {está} aqui, e, agora, levareis a Benjamim! Todas estas coisas vieram sobre mim.
Mas Rúben falou a seu pai, dizendo: Mata os meus dois filhos, se to não tornar a trazer; dá-mo em minha mão, e to tornarei a trazer.
Ele, porém, disse: Não descerá meu filho convosco, porquanto o seu irmão é morto, e só ele ficou. Se lhe sucede algum desastre no caminho por onde fordes, fareis descer minhas cãs com tristeza à sepultura.
E a fome {era} gravíssima na terra.
E aconteceu que, como acabaram de comer o mantimento que trouxeram do Egito, disse-lhes seu pai: Tornai, comprai-nos um pouco de alimento.
Mas Judá respondeu-lhe, dizendo: Fortemente nos protestou aquele varão, dizendo: Não vereis a minha face, se o vosso irmão não {vier} convosco.
Se enviares conosco o nosso irmão, desceremos e te compraremos alimento;
mas, se não {o} enviares, não desceremos, porquanto aquele varão nos disse: Não vereis a minha face, se o vosso irmão não {vier} convosco.
E disse Israel: Por que me fizestes {tal} mal, fazendo saber àquele varão que tínheis ainda {outro} irmão?
E eles disseram: Aquele varão particularmente nos perguntou por nós e pela nossa parentela, dizendo: Vive ainda vosso pai? Tendes mais um irmão? E respondemos-lhe conforme as mesmas palavras. Podíamos nós saber que diria: Trazei vosso irmão?
Então, disse Judá a Israel, seu pai: Envia o jovem comigo, e levantar-nos-emos e iremos, para que vivamos e não morramos, nem nós, nem tu, nem os nossos filhos.
Eu serei fiador por ele, da minha mão o requererás; se eu não to trouxer e não o puser perante a tua face, serei réu de crime para contigo para sempre.
E, se nós não nos tivéssemos detido, certamente já estaríamos segunda vez de volta.
Então, disse-lhes Israel, seu pai: Pois que assim {é,} fazei isso; tomai do mais precioso desta terra em vossos sacos e levai ao varão um presente: um pouco de bálsamo, um pouco de mel, especiarias, mirra, terebinto e amêndoas. {ou nozes da pistaceira}
E tomai em vossas mãos dinheiro dobrado; e o dinheiro que tornou na boca dos vossos sacos tornai a levar em vossas mãos; bem pode ser que fosse erro.
Tomai também a vosso irmão, e levantai-vos, e voltai àquele varão.
E Deus Todo-poderoso vos dê misericórdia diante do varão, para que deixe vir convosco vosso outro irmão, e Benjamim; e eu, {se for} desfilhado, desfilhado ficarei.
E os varões tomaram aquele presente e tomaram dinheiro dobrado em suas mãos e a Benjamim; e levantaram-se, e desceram ao Egito, e apresentaram-se diante da face de José.
Vendo, pois, José a Benjamim com eles, disse ao que {estava} sobre a sua casa: Leva {estes} varões à casa, e mata reses, e prepara tudo; porque {estes} varões comerão comigo ao meio-dia.
E o varão fez como José dissera e o varão levou aqueles varões à casa de José.
Então, temeram aqueles varões, porquanto foram levados à casa de José e diziam: Por causa do dinheiro que da outra vez voltou nos nossos sacos, fomos trazidos {aqui,} para nos criminar e cair sobre nós, para que nos tome por servos e a nossos jumentos.
Por isso, chegaram-se ao varão que {estava} sobre a casa de José, e falaram com ele à porta da casa.
E disseram: Ai! Senhor meu, certamente descemos, dantes, a comprar mantimento;
e aconteceu que, chegando nós à venda e abrindo os nossos sacos, eis que o dinheiro de cada varão {estava} na boca do seu saco, nosso dinheiro por seu peso; e tornamos a trazê-lo em nossas mãos.
Também trouxemos outro dinheiro em nossas mãos, para comprar mantimento; não sabemos quem tenha posto o nosso dinheiro nos nossos sacos.
E ele disse: Paz {seja} convosco, não temais; o vosso Deus, e o Deus de vosso pai, vos tem dado um tesouro nos vossos sacos; o vosso dinheiro me chegou a mim. E trouxe-lhes fora a Simeão.
Depois, levou o varão aqueles varões à casa de José e deu-{lhes} água, e lavaram os seus pés; também deu pasto aos seus jumentos.
E prepararam o presente, para quando José viesse ao meio-dia; porque tinham ouvido que ali haviam de comer pão.
Vindo, pois, José à casa, trouxeram-lhe ali o presente que estava na sua mão; e inclinaram-se a ele até à terra.
E ele lhes perguntou como estavam e disse: Vosso pai, o velho de quem falastes, está bem? Ainda vive?
E eles disseram: Bem está o teu servo, nosso pai vive ainda. E abaixaram a cabeça e inclinaram-se.
E ele levantou os olhos, e viu a Benjamim, seu irmão, filho de sua mãe, e disse: Este {é} o vosso irmão mais novo, de quem me falastes? Depois, ele disse: Deus te abençoe, meu filho.
E José apressou-se, porque o seu íntimo moveu-se para o seu irmão; e procurou {onde} chorar, e entrou na câmara, e chorou ali.
Depois, lavou o rosto e saiu; e conteve-se e disse: Ponde pão.
E puseram-lhe {a ele} à parte, e a eles à parte, e aos egípcios que comiam com ele à parte; porque os egípcios não podem comer pão com os hebreus, porquanto é abominação para os egípcios.
E assentaram-se diante dele, o primogênito segundo a sua primogenitura e o menor segundo a sua menoridade; do que os varões se maravilhavam entre si.
E apresentou-lhe as porções que {estavam} diante dele; porém a porção de Benjamim era cinco vezes maior do que a de qualquer deles. E eles beberam e se regalaram com ele.
E deu ordem ao que estava sobre a sua casa, dizendo: Enche de mantimento os sacos destes varões, quanto puderem levar, e põe o dinheiro de cada varão na boca do seu saco.
E o meu copo, o copo de prata, porás na boca do saco do mais novo, com o dinheiro do seu trigo. E fez conforme a palavra de José, que tinha dito.
Vinda a luz da manhã, despediram-se estes varões, eles com os seus jumentos.
Saindo eles da cidade {e} não se havendo ainda distanciado, disse José ao que {estava} sobre a sua casa: Levanta-te e persegue aqueles varões; e, alcançando-os, lhes dirás: Por que pagastes mal por bem?
Não {é} este o {copo} por que bebe meu senhor? E em que ele bem adivinha? Fizestes mal no que fizestes.
E alcançou-os e falou-lhes as mesmas palavras.
E eles disseram-lhe: Por que diz meu senhor tais palavras? Longe estejam teus servos de fazerem semelhante coisa.
Eis que o dinheiro que temos achado na boca dos nossos sacos te tornamos a trazer desde a terra de Canaã; como, pois, furtaríamos da casa do teu senhor prata ou ouro?
Aquele dos teus servos, com quem for achado, morra; e ainda nós seremos escravos do meu senhor.
E ele disse: Ora, seja também assim conforme as vossas palavras; aquele com quem se achar será meu escravo, porém vós sereis desculpados.
E eles apressaram-se, e cada um pôs em terra o seu saco, e cada um abriu o seu saco.
E buscou, começando no maior e acabando no mais novo; e achou-se o copo no saco de Benjamim.
Então, rasgaram as suas vestes, e carregou cada um o seu jumento, e tornaram à cidade.
E veio Judá com os seus irmãos à casa de José, porque ele ainda estava ali; e prostraram-se diante dele em terra.
E disse-lhes José: Que {é} isto que fizestes? Não sabeis vós que tal homem como eu bem adivinha?
Então, disse Judá: Que diremos a meu senhor? Que falaremos? E como nos justificaremos? Achou Deus a iniqüidade de teus servos; eis que {somos} escravos de meu senhor, tanto nós como aquele em cuja mão foi achado o copo.
Mas ele disse: Longe de mim que eu tal faça; o varão em cuja mão o copo foi achado, aquele será meu servo; porém vós subi em paz para vosso pai.
Então, Judá se chegou a ele e disse: Ai! Senhor meu, deixa, peço-te, o teu servo dizer uma palavra aos ouvidos de meu senhor, e não se acenda a tua ira contra o teu servo; porque tu {és} como Faraó.
Meu senhor perguntou a seus servos, dizendo: Tendes vós pai ou irmão?
E dissemos a meu senhor: Temos um velho pai e um moço da sua velhice, o mais novo, cujo irmão é morto; e só ele ficou de sua mãe, e seu pai o ama.
Então, tu disseste a teus servos: Trazei-mo a mim, e porei os meus olhos sobre ele.
E nós dissemos a meu senhor: Aquele moço não poderá deixar a seu pai; se deixar a seu pai, {este} morrerá.
Então, tu disseste a teus servos: Se vosso irmão mais novo não descer convosco, nunca mais vereis a minha face.
E aconteceu que, subindo nós a teu servo, meu pai, e contando-lhe as palavras de meu senhor,
disse nosso pai: Tornai, comprai-nos um pouco de mantimento.
E nós dissemos: Não poderemos descer; mas, se nosso irmão menor for conosco, desceremos; pois não poderemos ver a face do varão, se este nosso irmão menor não {estiver} conosco.
Então, disse-nos teu servo, meu pai: Vós sabeis que minha mulher me deu dois filhos;
um ausentou-se de mim, e eu disse: Certamente foi despedaçado, e não o tenho visto até agora;
se agora também tirardes a este da minha face, e lhe acontecer algum desastre, fareis descer as minhas cãs com dor à sepultura.
Agora, pois, indo eu a teu servo, meu pai, e o moço não indo conosco, como a sua alma está atada com a alma dele,
acontecerá que, vendo ele que o moço ali não {está,} morrerá; e teus servos farão descer as cãs de teu servo, nosso pai, com tristeza à sepultura.
Porque teu servo se deu por fiador por este moço para com meu pai, dizendo: Se não to tornar, eu serei culpado a meu pai todos os dias.
Agora, pois, fique teu servo em lugar deste moço por escravo de meu senhor, e que suba o moço com os seus irmãos.
Porque como subirei eu a meu pai, se o moço não {for} comigo? Para que não veja eu o mal que sobrevirá a meu pai.
Então, José não se podia conter diante de todos os que estavam com ele; e clamou: Fazei sair daqui a todo varão; e ninguém ficou com ele quando José se deu a conhecer a seus irmãos.
E levantou a sua voz com choro, de maneira que os egípcios o ouviam, e a casa de Faraó o ouviu.
E disse José a seus irmãos: Eu {sou} José; vive ainda meu pai? E seus irmãos não lhe puderam responder, porque estavam pasmados diante da sua face.
E disse José a seus irmãos: Peço-vos, chegai-vos a mim. E chegaram-se. Então, disse ele: Eu {sou} José, vosso irmão, a quem vendestes para o Egito.
Agora, pois, não vos entristeçais, nem vos pese aos vossos olhos por me haverdes vendido para cá; porque, para conservação da vida, Deus me enviou diante da vossa face.
Porque já houve dois anos de fome no meio da terra, e ainda {restam} cinco anos em que não haverá lavoura nem sega.
Pelo que Deus me enviou diante da vossa face, para conservar vossa sucessão na terra e para guardar-vos em vida por um grande livramento.
Assim, não {fostes} vós {que} me enviastes para cá, senão Deus, que me tem posto por pai de Faraó, e por senhor de toda a sua casa, e como regente {ou governador} em toda a terra do Egito.
Apressai-vos, e subi a meu pai, e dizei-lhe: Assim tem dito o teu filho José: Deus me tem posto por senhor em toda a terra do Egito; desce a mim e não te demores.
E habitarás na terra de Gósen e estarás perto de mim, tu e os teus filhos, e os filhos dos teus filhos, e as tuas ovelhas, e as tuas vacas, e tudo o que tens.
E ali te sustentarei, porque ainda {haverá} cinco anos de fome, para que não pereças de pobreza, tu, e tua casa, e tudo o que tens.
E eis que vossos olhos vêem, e os olhos de meu irmão Benjamim, {que é} minha boca que vos fala.
E fazei saber a meu pai toda a minha glória no Egito e tudo o que tendes visto; e apressai-vos a fazer descer meu pai para cá.
E lançou-se ao pescoço de Benjamim, seu irmão, e chorou; e Benjamim chorou {também} ao seu pescoço.
E beijou todos os seus irmãos e chorou sobre eles; e, depois, seus irmãos falaram com ele.
E a nova ouviu-se na casa de Faraó, dizendo: Os irmãos de José são vindos; e pareceu bem aos olhos de Faraó e aos olhos de seus servos.
E disse Faraó a José: Dize a teus irmãos: Fazei isto: carregai os vossos animais, e parti, e tornai à terra de Canaã,
e tornai a vosso pai e a vossas famílias, e vinde a mim; e eu vos darei o melhor da terra do Egito, e comereis a fartura da terra.
A ti, pois, é ordenado; fazei isto: tomai vós da terra do Egito carros para vossos meninos, para vossas mulheres e para vosso pai e vinde.
E não vos pese {coisa alguma} das vossas alfaias; porque o melhor de toda a terra do Egito {será} vosso.
E os filhos de Israel fizeram assim. E José deu-lhes carros, conforme o mandado de Faraó; também lhes deu comida para o caminho.
A todos lhes deu, a cada um, mudas de vestes; mas a Benjamim deu trezentas peças de prata e cinco mudas de vestes.
E a seu pai enviou semelhantemente dez jumentos carregados do melhor do Egito, e dez jumentos carregados de trigo, e pão, e comida para seu pai, para o caminho.
E despediu os seus irmãos, e partiram; e disse-lhes: Não contendais pelo caminho.
E subiram do Egito e vieram à terra de Canaã, a Jacó, seu pai.
Então, lhe anunciaram, dizendo: José ainda vive e ele também é regente em toda a terra do Egito. E o seu coração desmaiou, porque não os acreditava.
Porém, havendo-lhe eles contado todas as palavras de José que ele lhes falara, e vendo ele os carros que José enviara para levá-lo, reviveu o espírito de Jacó, seu pai.
E disse Israel: Basta; ainda vive meu filho José; eu irei e o verei antes que eu morra.
E partiu Israel com tudo quanto tinha, e veio a Berseba, e ofereceu sacrifícios ao Deus de Isaque, seu pai.
E falou Deus a Israel em visões, de noite, e disse: Jacó! Jacó! E ele disse: Eis-me {aqui.}
E disse: Eu {sou} Deus, o Deus de teu pai; não temas descer ao Egito, porque eu te farei ali uma grande nação.
E descerei contigo ao Egito e certamente te farei {tornar} a subir; e José porá a sua mão sobre os teus olhos.
Então, levantou-se Jacó de Berseba; e os filhos de Israel levaram Jacó, seu pai, e seus meninos, e as suas mulheres, nos carros que Faraó enviara para o levar.
E tomaram o seu gado e a sua fazenda que tinham adquirido na terra de Canaã e vieram ao Egito, Jacó e toda a sua semente com ele.
Os seus filhos, e os filhos de seus filhos com ele, as suas filhas, e as filhas de seus filhos, e toda a sua semente levou consigo ao Egito.
E estes {são} os nomes dos filhos de Israel, que vieram ao Egito, Jacó e seus filhos: Rúben, o primogênito de Jacó,
e os filhos de Rúben: Enoque, e Palu, e Hezrom, e Carmi.
E os filhos de Simeão: Jemuel, e Jamim, e Oade, e Jaquim, e Zoar, e Saul, filho de uma mulher cananéia.
E os filhos de Levi: Gérson, Coate e Merari.
E os filhos de Judá: Er, e Onã, e Selá, e Perez, e Zerá. Er e Onã, porém, morreram na terra de Canaã; e os filhos de Perez foram Esrom e Hamul.
E os filhos de Issacar: Tola, e Puva, e Jó, e Sinrom.
E os filhos de Zebulom: Serede, e Elom, e Jaleel.
Estes {são} os filhos de Léia, que deu a Jacó em Padã-Arã, com Diná, sua filha; todas as almas de seus filhos e de suas filhas {foram} trinta e três.
E os filhos de Gade: Zifiom, e Hagi, e Suni, e Esbom, e Eri, e Arodi, e Areli.
E os filhos de Aser: Imna, e Isvá, e Isvi, e Berias, e Será, a irmã deles; e os filhos de Berias: Héber e Malquiel.
Estes são os filhos de Zilpa, a qual Labão deu à sua filha Léia e que deu a Jacó estas dezesseis almas.
Os filhos de Raquel, mulher de Jacó: José e Benjamim.
E nasceram a José na terra do Egito Manassés e Efraim, que lhe deu Asenate, filha de Potífera, sacerdote de Om.
E os filhos de Benjamim: Belá, e Bequer, e Asbel, e Gera, e Naamã, e Eí, e Rôs, e Mupim, e Hupim, e Arde.
Estes são os filhos de Raquel, que nasceram a Jacó, ao todo catorze almas.
E o filho de Dã: Husim.
E os filhos de Naftali: Jazeel, e Guni, e Jezer, e Silém.
Estes são os filhos de Bila, a qual Labão deu à sua filha Raquel e que deu estes a Jacó; todas as almas foram sete.
Todas as almas que vieram com Jacó ao Egito, que descenderam dele, fora as mulheres dos filhos de Jacó, todas foram sessenta e seis almas.
E os filhos de José, que lhe nasceram no Egito, {eram} duas almas. Todas as almas da casa de Jacó, que vieram ao Egito, {foram} setenta.
E {Jacó} enviou Judá diante da sua face a José, para o encaminhar a Gósen; e chegaram à terra de Gósen.
Então, José aprontou o seu carro e subiu ao encontro de Israel, seu pai, a Gósen. E, mostrando-se-lhe, lançou-se ao seu pescoço e chorou sobre o seu pescoço, longo tempo.
E Israel disse a José: Morra eu agora, pois já tenho visto o teu rosto, que ainda vives.
Depois, disse José a seus irmãos e à casa de seu pai: Eu subirei, e anunciarei a Faraó, e lhe direi: Meus irmãos e a casa de meu pai, que {estavam} na terra de Canaã, vieram a mim.
E os varões {são} pastores de ovelhas, porque são homens de gado, e trouxeram consigo as suas ovelhas, e as suas vacas, e tudo o que têm.
Quando, pois, acontecer que Faraó vos chamar e disser: Qual {é} o vosso negócio? {ou ocupação}
Então, direis: Teus servos foram homens de gado desde a nossa mocidade até agora, tanto nós como os nossos pais; para que habiteis na terra de Gósen, porque todo o pastor de ovelhas {é} abominação para os egípcios.
Então, veio José, e anunciou a Faraó, e disse: Meu pai, e os meus irmãos, e as suas ovelhas, e as suas vacas, com tudo o que têm, chegaram da terra de Canaã, e eis que {estão} na terra de Gósen.
E tomou uma parte de seus irmãos, a {saber,} cinco varões, e os pôs diante de Faraó.
Então, disse Faraó a seus irmãos: Qual é o vosso negócio? E eles disseram a Faraó: Teus servos {são} pastores de ovelhas, tanto nós como nossos pais.
Disseram mais a Faraó: Viemos para peregrinar nesta terra; porque não há pasto para as ovelhas de teus servos, porquanto a fome {é} grave na terra de Canaã; agora, pois, rogamos-te que teus servos habitem na terra de Gósen.
Então, falou Faraó a José, dizendo: Teu pai e teus irmãos vieram a ti.
A terra do Egito está diante da tua face; no melhor da terra faze habitar teu pai e teus irmãos; habitem na terra de Gósen; e, se sabes que entre eles há homens valentes, {ou aptos} os porás por maiorais do gado, sobre o que eu tenho.
E trouxe José a Jacó, seu pai, e o pôs diante de Faraó; e Jacó abençoou a Faraó.
E Faraó disse a Jacó: Quantos {são} os dias dos anos de tua vida?
E Jacó disse a Faraó: Os dias dos anos das minhas peregrinações {são} cento e trinta anos; poucos e maus foram os dias dos anos da minha vida e não chegaram aos dias dos anos da vida de meus pais, nos dias das suas peregrinações.
E Jacó abençoou a Faraó e saiu de diante da face de Faraó.
E José fez habitar a seu pai e seus irmãos e deu-lhes possessão na terra do Egito, no melhor da terra, na terra de Ramessés, como Faraó ordenara.
E José sustentou de pão a seu pai, e a seus irmãos, e a toda a casa de seu pai, segundo as suas famílias.
E não {havia} pão em toda a terra, porque a fome {era} mui grave; de maneira que a terra do Egito e a terra de Canaã desfaleciam por causa da fome.
Então, José recolheu todo o dinheiro que se achou na terra do Egito e na terra de Canaã, pelo trigo que compravam; e José trouxe o dinheiro à casa de Faraó.
Acabando-se, pois, o dinheiro na terra do Egito e na terra de Canaã, vieram todos os egípcios a José, dizendo: Dá-nos pão; por que morreremos em tua presença? Porquanto o dinheiro nos falta.
E José disse: Dai o vosso gado, e eu vo-lo darei por vosso gado, se falta o dinheiro.
Então, trouxeram o seu gado a José; e José deu-lhes pão em {troca} de cavalos, e das ovelhas, e das vacas, e dos jumentos; e os sustentou de pão aquele ano por todo o seu gado.
E, acabado aquele ano, vieram a ele no segundo ano e disseram-lhe: Não ocultaremos ao meu senhor que o dinheiro é acabado, e meu senhor possui os animais; nenhuma outra coisa {nos} ficou diante da face de meu senhor, senão o nosso corpo e a nossa terra.
Por que morreremos diante dos teus olhos, tanto nós como a nossa terra? Compra-nos a nós e à nossa terra por pão, e nós e a nossa terra seremos servos de Faraó; dá semente para que vivamos e não morramos, e a terra não se desole.
Assim, José comprou toda a terra do Egito para Faraó, porque os egípcios venderam cada um o seu campo, porquanto a fome era extrema sobre eles; e a terra ficou {sendo} de Faraó.
E, quanto ao povo, fê-lo passar às cidades, desde {uma} extremidade da terra do Egito até à {outra} extremidade.
Somente a terra dos sacerdotes não a comprou, porquanto os sacerdotes tinham porção de Faraó e eles comiam a sua porção que Faraó lhes tinha dado; por isso, não venderam a sua terra.
Então, disse José ao povo: Eis que hoje vos tenho comprado a vós e a vossa terra para Faraó; eis aí tendes semente para vós, para que semeeis a terra.
Há de ser, porém, que das colheitas dareis o quinto a Faraó, e as quatro partes serão vossas, para semente do campo, e para o vosso mantimento, e dos que {estão} nas vossas casas, e para que comam vossos meninos.
E disseram: A vida nos tens dado; achemos graça aos olhos de meu senhor e seremos servos de Faraó.
José, pois, pôs isto por estatuto, até ao dia de hoje, sobre a terra do Egito: que Faraó tirasse o quinto; só a terra dos sacerdotes não ficou {sendo} de Faraó.
Assim, habitou Israel na terra do Egito, na terra de Gósen, e nela tomaram possessão, e frutificaram, e multiplicaram-se muito.
E Jacó viveu na terra do Egito dezessete anos; de sorte que os dias de Jacó, os anos da sua vida, foram cento e quarenta e sete anos.
Chegando-se, pois, o tempo da morte de Israel, chamou a José, seu filho, e disse-lhe: Se agora tenho achado graça aos teus olhos, rogo-te que ponhas a tua mão debaixo da minha coxa, e usa comigo de beneficência e verdade; rogo-te que me não enterres no Egito,
mas que {eu} jaza com os meus pais; por isso, me levarás do Egito e me sepultarás na sepultura deles. E ele disse: Farei conforme a tua palavra.
E disse ele: Jura-me. E ele jurou-lhe; e Israel inclinou-se sobre a cabeceira da cama.
E aconteceu, depois destas coisas, que disseram a José: Eis que teu pai está enfermo. Então, tomou consigo os seus dois filhos, Manassés e Efraim.
E um deu parte a Jacó e disse: Eis que José, teu filho, vem a ti. E esforçou-se Israel e assentou-se sobre a cama.
E Jacó disse a José: O Deus Todo-poderoso me apareceu em Luz, na terra de Canaã, e me abençoou,
e me disse: Eis que te farei frutificar e multiplicar, e te porei por multidão de povos, e darei esta terra à tua semente depois de ti, em possessão perpétua.
Agora, pois, os teus dois filhos, que te nasceram na terra do Egito, antes que eu viesse a ti no Egito, {são} meus; Efraim e Manassés serão meus, como Rúben e Simeão.
Mas a tua geração, que gerarás depois deles, será tua; segundo o nome de seus irmãos serão chamados na sua herança.
Vindo, pois, eu de Padã, me morreu Raquel na terra de Canaã, no caminho, quando ainda {ficava um pequeno} espaço de terra para vir a Efrata; e eu a sepultei ali, no caminho de Efrata, que {é} Belém.
E Israel viu os filhos de José e disse: Quem {são} estes?
E José disse a seu pai: Eles {são} meus filhos, que Deus me tem dado aqui. E ele disse: Peço-te, traze-mos aqui, para que os abençoe.
Os olhos, porém, de Israel eram carregados de velhice, já não podia ver bem; e fê-los chegar a ele, e beijou-os e abraçou-os.
E Israel disse a José: Eu não cuidara ver o teu rosto; e eis que Deus me fez ver a tua semente também.
Então, José os tirou de seus joelhos e inclinou-se à terra diante da sua face.
E tomou José a ambos, a Efraim na sua mão direita, à esquerda de Israel, e a Manassés na sua mão esquerda, à direita de Israel, e fê-los chegar a ele.
Mas Israel estendeu a sua mão direita e a pôs sobre a cabeça de Efraim, ainda que era o menor, e a sua esquerda sobre a cabeça de Manassés, dirigindo as suas mãos avisadamente, ainda que Manassés {era} o primogênito.
E abençoou a José e disse: O Deus, em cuja presença andaram os meus pais Abraão e Isaque, o Deus que me sustentou, desde que eu nasci até este dia,
o Anjo que me livrou {ou remiu} de todo o mal, abençoe estes rapazes; e seja chamado neles o meu nome e o nome de meus pais Abraão e Isaque; e multipliquem-se, como peixes em multidão, no meio da terra.
Vendo, pois, José que seu pai punha a sua mão direita sobre a cabeça de Efraim, foi mau aos seus olhos; e tomou a mão de seu pai, para a transpor de sobre a cabeça de Efraim à cabeça de Manassés.
E José disse a seu pai: Não assim, meu pai, porque este {é} o primogênito; põe a tua mão direita sobre a sua cabeça.
Mas seu pai {o} recusou e disse: Eu o sei, filho meu, eu o sei; também ele será um povo e também ele será grande; contudo, o seu irmão menor será maior que ele, e a sua semente será uma multidão {Heb. plenitude} de nações.
Assim, os abençoou naquele dia, dizendo: Em ti Israel abençoará, dizendo: Deus te ponha como a Efraim e como a Manassés. E pôs a Efraim diante de Manassés.
Depois, disse Israel a José: Eis que eu morro, mas Deus será convosco e vos fará tornar à terra de vossos pais.
E eu te tenho dado a ti um pedaço de terra mais que a teus irmãos, o qual tomei com a minha espada e com o meu arco da mão dos amorreus.
Depois, chamou Jacó a seus filhos e disse: Ajuntai-vos, e anunciar-vos-ei o que vos há de acontecer nos derradeiros dias;
ajuntai-vos e ouvi, filhos de Jacó; e ouvi a Israel, vosso pai:
Rúben, tu {és} meu primogênito, minha força e o princípio de meu vigor, o {mais} excelente em alteza e o {mais} excelente em poder.
Inconstante como a água, não serás o {mais} excelente, porquanto subiste ao leito de teu pai. Então, o contaminaste; subiste à minha cama.
Simeão e Levi {são} irmãos; as suas espadas {são} instrumentos de violência.
No seu secreto conselho, não entre minha alma; com a sua congregação, minha glória não se ajunte; porque, no seu furor, mataram varões e, na sua teima, arrebataram bois.
Maldito {seja} o seu furor, pois era forte, e a sua ira, pois era dura; eu os dividirei em Jacó e os espalharei em Israel.
Judá, a ti te louvarão os teus irmãos; a tua mão {será} sobre o pescoço de seus inimigos; os filhos de teu pai a ti se inclinarão.
Judá {é} um leãozinho; da presa subiste, filho meu. Encurva-se e deita-se como um leão e como um leão velho; quem o despertará?
O cetro não se arredará de Judá, nem o legislador dentre seus pés, até que venha Siló; e a ele se {ou obedecerão} congregarão os povos.
Ele amarrará o seu jumentinho à vide e o filho da sua jumenta, à cepa mais excelente; ele lavará a sua veste no vinho e a sua capa, em sangue de uvas.
Os olhos serão vermelhos de vinho, e os dentes, brancos de leite.
Zebulom habitará no porto dos mares e será como porto dos navios; e o seu termo {será} em Sidom.
Issacar {é} jumento de fortes ossos, deitado {ou pousado entre os currais} entre dois fardos.
E viu ele que o descanso {era} bom e que a terra era deliciosa, e abaixou o seu ombro para acarretar, e serviu debaixo de tributo.
Dã julgará o seu povo, como uma das tribos de Israel.
Dã será serpente junto ao caminho, uma víbora junto à vereda, que morde os calcanhares do cavalo e faz cair o seu cavaleiro por detrás.
A tua salvação espero, ó SENHOR!
{Quanto} a Gade, uma tropa o acometerá; mas ele {a} acometerá por fim.
De Aser, o seu pão {será} abundante e ele dará delícias reais.
Naftali {é} uma cerva solta; ele dá palavras formosas.
José {é} um ramo frutífero, ramo frutífero junto à fonte; seus ramos correm sobre o muro.
Os flecheiros lhe deram amargura, e o flecharam, e o aborreceram. {ou perseguiram}
O seu arco, porém, susteve-se no forte, e os braços de suas mãos foram fortalecidos pelas mãos do Valente de Jacó (donde {é} o Pastor e a Pedra de Israel),
pelo Deus de teu pai, o qual te ajudará, e pelo Todo-poderoso, o qual te abençoará com bênçãos dos céus de cima, com bênçãos do abismo que está debaixo, com bênçãos dos peitos e da madre.
As bênçãos de teu pai excederão as bênçãos de meus pais, até à extremidade dos outeiros eternos; elas estarão sobre a cabeça de José e sobre o alto da cabeça do que foi separado de seus irmãos.
Benjamim {é} lobo {que} despedaça; pela manhã, comerá a presa e, à tarde, repartirá o despojo.
Todas estas {são} as doze tribos de Israel; e isto {é} o que lhes falou seu pai quando os abençoou; a cada um deles abençoou segundo a sua bênção.
Depois, ordenou-lhes e disse-lhes: Eu me congrego ao meu povo; sepultai-me, com meus pais, na cova que {está} no campo de Efrom, o heteu,
na cova que {está} no campo de Macpela, que está em frente de Manre, na terra de Canaã, a qual Abraão comprou com aquele campo de Efrom, o heteu, por herança de sepultura.
Ali, sepultaram Abraão e Sara, sua mulher; ali, sepultaram Isaque e Rebeca, sua mulher; e, ali, eu sepultei Léia.
O campo e a cova que {está} nele {foram} comprados aos filhos de Hete.
Acabando, pois, Jacó de dar mandamentos a seus filhos, encolheu os seus pés na cama, e expirou, e foi congregado ao seu povo.
Então, José se lançou sobre o rosto de seu pai, e chorou sobre ele, e o beijou.
E José ordenou aos seus servos, os médicos, que embalsamassem o seu pai; e os médicos embalsamaram Israel.
E cumpriram-se-lhe quarenta dias, porque assim se cumprem os dias daqueles que se embalsamam; e os egípcios o choraram setenta dias.
Passados os dias de seu choro, falou José à casa de Faraó, dizendo: Se agora tenho achado graça aos vossos olhos, rogo-vos que faleis aos ouvidos de Faraó, dizendo:
Meu pai me fez jurar, dizendo: Eis que eu morro; em meu sepulcro, que cavei para mim na terra de Canaã, ali me sepultarás. Agora, pois, te peço, que eu suba, para que sepulte o meu pai; então, voltarei.
E Faraó disse: Sobe e sepulta o teu pai, como ele te fez jurar.
E José subiu para sepultar o seu pai; e subiram com ele todos os servos de Faraó, os anciãos da sua casa e todos os anciãos da terra do Egito,
como também toda a casa de José, e seus irmãos, e a casa de seu pai; somente deixaram na terra de Gósen os seus meninos, e as suas ovelhas, e as suas vacas.
E subiram também com ele tanto carros como gente a cavalo; e o concurso foi grandíssimo.
Chegando eles, pois, à eira {ou eira de Atade} do espinhal, que {está} além do Jordão, fizeram um grande e gravíssimo pranto; e fez a seu pai um grande pranto por sete dias.
E, vendo os moradores da terra, os cananeus, o luto na eira do espinhal, disseram: É este o pranto grande dos egípcios. Por isso, chamou-se o seu nome Abel-Mizraim, que {está} além do Jordão.
E fizeram-lhe os seus filhos assim como ele lhes ordenara,
pois os seus filhos o levaram à terra de Canaã e o sepultaram na cova do campo de Macpela, que Abraão tinha comprado com o campo, por herança de sepultura, a Efrom, o heteu, em frente de Manre.
Depois, tornou José para o Egito, ele, e seus irmãos, e todos os que com ele subiram a sepultar o seu pai, depois de haver sepultado o seu pai.
Vendo, então, os irmãos de José que o seu pai já estava morto, disseram: Porventura, nos aborrecerá José e nos pagará certamente todo o mal que lhe fizemos.
Portanto, enviaram a José, dizendo: Teu pai mandou, antes da sua morte, dizendo:
Assim direis a José: Perdoa, rogo-te, a transgressão de teus irmãos e o seu pecado, porque te fizeram mal; agora, pois, rogamos-te que perdoes a transgressão dos servos do Deus de teu pai. E José chorou quando eles lhe falavam.
Depois, vieram também seus irmãos, e prostraram-se diante dele, e disseram: Eis-nos aqui por teus servos.
E José lhes disse: Não temais; porque, porventura, {estou} eu em lugar de Deus?
Vós bem intentastes mal contra mim, {porém} Deus o tornou em bem, para fazer como se vê neste dia, para conservar em vida a um povo grande.
Agora, pois, não temais; eu vos sustentarei a vós e a vossos meninos. Assim, os consolou e falou segundo o coração deles.
José, pois, habitou no Egito, ele e a casa de seu pai; e viveu José cento e dez anos.
E viu José os filhos de Efraim, da terceira {geração;} também os filhos de Maquir, filho de Manassés, nasceram sobre os joelhos de José.
E disse José a seus irmãos: Eu morro, mas Deus certamente vos visitará e vos fará subir desta terra para a terra que jurou a Abraão, a Isaque e a Jacó.
E José fez jurar os filhos de Israel, dizendo: Certamente, vos visitará Deus, e fareis transportar os meus ossos daqui.
E morreu José da idade de cento e dez anos; e o embalsamaram e o puseram num caixão no Egito.
I begynnelsen skapade Gud himmel och jord.
Och jorden var öde och tom, och mörker var över djupet, och Guds
Ande svävade över vattnet.
Och Gud sade: ╜Varde ljus╜; och det vart ljus.
Och Gud såg att ljuset var gott; och Gud skilde ljuset från
mörkret.
Och Gud kallade ljuset dag, och mörkret kallade han natt.  Och
det vart afton, och det vart morgon, den första dagen.

Och Gud sade: ╜Varde mitt i vattnet ett fäste som skiljer vatten
från vatten.╜
Och Gud gjorde fästet, och skilde vattnet under fästet från
vattnet ovan fästet; och det skedde så.
Och Gud kallade fästet himmel.  Och det vart afton, och det vart
morgon, den andra dagen.

Och Gud sade: ╜Samle sig det vatten som är under himmelen till
en särskild plats, så att det torra bliver synligt.╜  Och det
skedde så.
Och Gud kallade det torra jord, och vattensamlingen kallade han
hav.  Och Gud såg att det var gott.
Och Gud sade: ╜Frambringe jorden grönska, fröbärande örter och
fruktträd, som efter sina arter bära frukt, vari de hava sitt
frö, på jorden.╜  Och det skedde så;
jorden frambragte grönska, fröbärande örter, efter deras arter,
och träd som efter sina arter buro frukt, vari de hade sitt frö.
Och Gud såg att det var gott.
Och det vart afton, och det vart morgon, den tredje dagen.

Och Gud sade: ╜Varde på himmelens fäste ljus som skilja dagen
från natten, och vare de till tecken och till att utmärka
särskilda tider, dagar och år,
och vare de på himmelens fäste till ljus som lysa över jorden.╜
Och det skedde så;
Gud gjorde de två stora ljusen, det större ljuset till att råda
över dagen, och det mindre ljuset till att råda över natten, så
ock stjärnorna.
Och Gud satte dem på himmelens fäste till att lysa över jorden,
och till att råda över dagen och över natten, och till att
skilja ljuset från mörkret.  Och Gud såg att det var gott.
Och det vart afton, och det vart morgon, den fjärde dagen.

Och Gud sade: ╜Frambringe vattnet ett vimmel av levande
varelser; flyge ock fåglar över jorden under himmelens fäste.╜
Och Gud skapade de stora havsdjuren och hela det stim av levande
varelser, som vattnet vimlar av, efter deras arter, så ock alla
bevingade fåglar, efter deras arter.  Och Gud såg att det var
gott.
Och Gud välsignade dem och sade: ╜Varen fruktsamma och föröken
eder, och uppfyllen vattnet i haven; föröke sig ock fåglarna på
jorden.╜
Och det vart afton, och det vart morgon, den femte dagen.

Och Gud sade: ╜Frambringe jorden levande varelser, efter deras
arter, boskapsdjur och kräldjur och vilda djur, efter deras
arter.╜  Och det skedde så;
Gud gjorde de vilda djuren, efter deras arter, och
boskapsdjuren, efter deras arter, och alla kräldjur på marken,
efter deras arter.  Och Gud såg att det var gott.
Och Gud sade: ╜Låt oss göra människor till vår avbild, till att
vara oss lika; och må de råda över fiskarna i havet och över
fåglarna under himmelen och över boskapsdjuren och över hela
jorden och över alla kräldjur som röra sig på jorden.╜
Och Gud skapade människan till sin avbild, till Guds avbild
skapade han henne, till man och kvinna skapade han dem.
Och Gud välsignade dem; Gud sade till dem: ╜Varen fruktsamma och
föröken eder, och uppfyllen jorden och läggen den under eder;
och råden över fiskarna i havet och över fåglarna under himmelen
och över alla djur som röra sig på jorden.╜
Och Gud sade: ╜Se, jag giver eder alla fröbärande örter på hela
jorden och alla träd med fröbärande trädfrukt; detta skolen I
hava till föda.
Men åt alla djur på jorden och åt alla fåglar under himmelen och
åt allt som krälar på jorden, vad som i sig har en levande själ,
åt dessa giver jag alla gröna örter till föda.╜  Och det skedde
så.
Och Gud såg på allt som han hade gjort, och se, det var mycket
gott.  Och det vart afton, och det vart morgon, den sjätte
dagen.
Så blevo nu himmelen och jorden fullbordade med hela sin
härskara.
Och Gud fullbordade på sjunde dagen det verk som han hade gjort;
och han vilade på sjunde dagen från allt det verk som han hade
gjort.
Och Gud välsignade den sjunde dagen och helgade den, därför att
han på den dagen vilade från allt sitt verk, det som Gud hade
gjort, när han skapade.

Detta är berättelsen om den ordning i vilken allt blev till på
himmelen och jorden, när de skapades, då när HERREN Gud gjorde
jord och himmel.

Då bar jorden ännu ingen buske på marken, och ingen ört hade
ännu skjutit upp på marken, ty HERREN Gud hade icke låtit regna
på jorden, och ingen människa fanns, som kunde bruka jorden;
men en dimma steg upp från jorden och vattnade hela marken.
Och HERREN Gud danade människan av stoft från jorden och
inblåste livsande i hennes näsa, och så blev människan en
levande varelse.

Och HERREN Gud planterade en lustgård i Eden österut och satte
däri människan som han hade danat.
HERREN Gud lät nämligen alla slags träd som voro ljuvliga att se
på och goda att äta av växa upp ur marken, och livets träd mitt
i lustgården, så ock kunskapens träd på gott och ont.
Och från Eden gick en flod ut, som vattnade lustgården; sedan
delade den sig i fyra grenar.
Den första heter Pison; det är den som flyter omkring hela
landet Havila, där guld finnes,
och det landets guld är gott; där finnes ock bdelliumharts och
onyxsten.
Den andra floden heter Gihon; det är den som flyter omkring hela
landet Kus.
Den tredje floden heter Hiddekel; det är den som har sitt lopp
öster om Assyrien.  Den fjärde floden är Frat.
Så tog nu HERREN Gud mannen och satte honom i Edens lustgård,
till att bruka och bevara den.
Och HERREN Gud bjöd mannen och sade: ╜Av alla andra träd i
lustgården må du fritt äta,
men av kunskapens träd på gott och ont skall du icke äta, ty när
du äter därav, skall du döden dö.╜

Och HERREN Gud sade: ╜Det är icke gott att mannen är allena.  Jag
vill göra åt honom en hjälp, en sådan som honom höves.╜
Och HERREN Gud danade av jord alla markens djur och alla
himmelens fåglar, och förde dem fram till mannen för att se huru
denne skulle kalla dem; ty såsom mannen kallade var levande
varelse, så skulle den heta.
Och mannen gav namn åt alla boskapsdjur, åt fåglarna under
himmelen och åt alla markens djur.  Men för Adam fann han icke
någon hjälp, sådan som honom hövdes.
Då lät HERREN Gud en tung sömn falla på mannen, och när han hade
somnat, tog han ut ett av hans revben och fyllde dess plats med
kött.
Och HERREN Gud byggde en kvinna av revbenet som han hade tagit
av mannen, och förde henne fram till mannen.
Då sade mannen: ╜Ja, denna är nu ben av mina ben och kött av
mitt kött.  Hon skall heta maninna, ty av man är hon tagen.╜

Fördenskull skall en man övergiva sin fader och sin moder och
hålla sig till sin hustru, och de skola varda ett kött.

Och mannen och hans hustru voro båda nakna och blygdes icke för
varandra.

Men ormen var listigare än alla andra markens djur som HERREN
Gud hade gjort; och han sade till kvinnan: ╜Skulle då Gud hava
sagt: 'I skolen icke äta av något träd i lustgården'?╜
Kvinnan svarade ormen: ╜Vi få äta av frukten på de andra träden
i lustgården,
men om frukten på det träd som står mitt i lustgården har Gud
sagt: 'I skolen icke äta därav, ej heller komma därvid, på det
att I icke mån dö.'╜
Då sade ormen till kvinnan: ╜Ingalunda skolen I dö;
men Gud vet, att när I äten därav, skola edra ögon öppnas, så
att I bliven såsom Gud och förstån vad gott och ont är.╜
Och kvinnan såg att trädet var gott att äta av, och att det var en
lust för ögonen, och att det var ett ljuvligt träd, eftersom man
därav fick förstånd, och hon tog av dess frukt och åt; och hon gav
jämväl åt sin man, som var med henne, och han åt.

Då öppnades bådas ögon, och de blevo varse att de voro
nakna; och de fäste ihop fikonlöv och bundo omkring sig.

Och de hörde HERREN Gud vandra i lustgården, när dagen begynte
svalkas; då gömde sig mannen med sin hustru för HERREN Guds
ansikte bland träden i lustgården.
Men HERREN Gud kallade på mannen och sade till honom: ╜Var är
du?╜
Han svarade: ╜Jag hörde dig i lustgården; då blev jag förskräckt,
eftersom jag är naken; därför gömde jag mig.╜
Då sade han: ╜Vem har låtit dig förstå att du är naken?  Har du
icke ätit av det träd som jag förbjöd dig att äta av?╜
Mannen svarade: ╜Kvinnan som du har givit mig till att vara med
mig, hon gav mig av trädet, så att jag åt.╜
Då sade HERREN Gud till kvinnan: ╜Vad är det du har gjort!╜
Kvinnan svarade: ╜Ormen bedrog mig, så att jag åt.╜

Då sade HERREN Gud till ormen: ╜Eftersom du har gjort detta,
vare du förbannad bland alla djur, boskapsdjur och vilda djur.
På din buk skall du gå, och stoft skall du äta i alla dina
livsdagar.
Och jag skall sätta fiendskap mellan dig och kvinnan, och
mellan din säd och hennes säd.  Denna skall söndertrampa ditt
huvud, och du skall stinga den i hälen.╜
Och till kvinnan sade han: ╜Jag skall låta dig utstå mycken
vedermöda, när du bliver havande; med smärta skall du föda dina
barn.  Men till din man skall din åtrå vara, och han skall råda
över dig.╜
Och till Adam sade han: ╜Eftersom du lyssnade till din hustrus
ord och åt av det träd om vilket jag hade bjudit dig och sagt:
'Du skall icke äta därav', därför vare marken förbannad för din
skull.  Med vedermöda skall du nära dig av den i alla dina
livsdagar;
törne och tistel skall den bära åt dig, men markens örter skola
vara din föda.
I ditt anletes svett skall du äta ditt bröd, till dess du vänder
åter till jorden; ty av den är du tagen.  Ty du är stoft, och
till stoft skall du åter varda.╜

Och mannen gav sin hustru namnet <spärr>Eva</spärr>, ty hon
blev en moder åt allt levande.
Och HERREN Gud gjorde åt Adam och hans hustru kläder av skinn
och satte på dem.

Och HERREN Gud sade: ╜Se, mannen har blivit såsom en av oss, så
att han förstår vad gott och ont är.  Må han nu icke räcka ut sin
hand och taga jämväl av livets träd och äta, och så leva
evinnerligen.╜
Och HERREN Gud förvisade honom ur Edens lustgård, för att han
skulle bruka jorden, varav han var tagen.
Och han drev ut mannen, och satte öster om Edens lustgård
keruberna jämte det ljungande svärdets lågor, för att bevaka
vägen till livets träd.

Och mannen kände sin hustru Eva, och hon blev havande och födde
Kain; då sade hon: ╜Jag har <spärr>fött</spärr> en man genom
HERRENS hjälp.╜
Och hon födde åter en son, Abel, den förres broder.  Och Abel
blev en fårherde, men Kain blev en åkerman.
Och efter någon tid hände sig att Kain av markens frukt bar fram
en offergåva åt HERREN.
Också Abel bar fram sin gåva, av det förstfödda i hans hjord, av
djurens fett.  Och HERREN såg till Abel och hans offergåva;
men till Kain och hans offergåva såg han icke.  Då blev Kain
mycket vred, och hans blick blev mörk.
Och HERREN sade till Kain: ╜Varför är du vred, och varför är din
blick så mörk?
Är det icke så: om du har gott i sinnet, då ser du frimodigt
upp; men om du icke har gott i sinnet, då lurar synden vid
dörren; till dig står hennes åtrå, men du bör råda över henne.╜
Och Kain talade med sin broder Abel; och när de voro ute på
marken, överföll Kain sin broder Abel och dräpte honom.

Då sade HERREN till Kain: ╜Var är din broder Abel?╜  Han svarade:
╜Jag vet icke; skall jag taga vara på min broder?╜
Då sade han: ╜Vad har du gjort!  Hör, din broders blod ropar
till mig från jorden.
Så vare du nu förbannad och förvisad ifrån åkerjorden, som har
öppnat sin mun för att mottaga din broders blod av din hand.

När du brukar jorden, skall den icke mer giva dig sin gröda.
Ostadig och flyktig skall du bliva på jorden.╜
Då sade Kain till HERREN: ╜Min missgärning är större än att jag
kan bära den.
Se, du driver mig nu bort ifrån åkerjorden, och jag måste gömma
mig undan för ditt ansikte.  Ostadig och flyktig skall jag bliva
på jorden, och så skall ske att vemhelst som möter mig, han
dräper mig.╜
Men HERREN sade till honom: ╜Nej, ty Kain skall bliva hämnad
sjufalt, vemhelst som dräper honom.╜  Och HERREN satte ett
tecken till skydd för Kain, så att ingen som mötte honom skulle
slå honom ihjäl.
Så gick Kain bort ifrån HERRENS ansikte och bosatte sig i landet
Nod, öster om Eden.

Och Kain kände sin hustru, och hon blev havande och födde Hanok.
Och han byggde en stad och kallade den staden Hanok, efter sin
sons namn.
Och åt Hanok föddes Irad, och Irad födde Mehujael, och Mehujael
födde Metusael, och Metusael födde Lemek.
Men Lemek tog sig två hustrur; den ena hette Ada, den andra
Silla.
Och Ada födde Jabal; han blev stamfader för dem som bo i tält
och idka boskapsskötsel.
Och hans broder hette Jubal; han blev stamfader för alla dem som
hantera harpa och pipa.
Men Silla födde ock en son, Tubal-Kain; han var smed och gjorde
alla slags redskap av koppar och järn.  Och Tubal-Kains syster
var Naama.
Och Lemek sade till sina hustrur:
  ╜Ada och Silla,
      hören mina ord;
  I Lemeks hustrur,
      lyssnen till mitt tal:
  Se, en man dräper jag för vart sår jag får,
  och en yngling för var blånad jag får.
Ja, sjufalt hämnad bliver Kain,
  men Lemek sju- och sjuttiofalt.╜

Och Adam kände åter sin hustru, och hon födde en son och gav
honom namnet Set, i det hon sade: ╜Gud har
<spärr>beskärt</spärr> mig en annan livsfrukt, till
ersättning för Abel, eftersom Kain dräpte honom.╜
Men åt Set föddes ock en son, och han gav honom namnet Enos.  Vid
denna tid begynte man åkalla HERRENS namn.

Detta är stycket om Adams släkt.  När Gud skapade människor,
gjorde han dem lika Gud.
Till man och kvinna skapade han dem; och han välsignade dem och
gav dem namnet människa, när de blevo skapade.

När Adam var ett hundra trettio år gammal, födde han en son som
var honom lik, hans avbild, och gav honom namnet Set.
Och sedan Adam hade fött Set, levde han åtta hundra år och födde
söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Adams hela levnadsålder nio hundra trettio år;
därefter dog han.

När Set var ett hundra fem år gammal, födde han Enos.
Och sedan Set hade fött Enos, levde han åtta hundra sju år och
födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Sets hela ålder nio hundra tolv år; därefter dog
han.

När Enos var nittio år gammal, födde han Kenan.
Och sedan Enos hade fött Kenan, levde han åtta hundra femton år
och födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Enos' hela ålder nio hundra fem år; därefter dog
han.

När Kenan var sjuttio år gammal, födde han Mahalalel.
Och sedan Kenan fött Mahalalel, levde han åtta hundra fyrtio år
och födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Kenans hela ålder nio hundra tio år; därefter dog
han.

När Mahalalel var sextiofem år gammal, födde han Jered.
Och sedan Mahalalel hade fött Jered, levde han åtta hundra
trettio år och födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Mahalalels hela ålder åtta hundra nittiofem år;
därefter dog han.

När Jered var ett hundra sextiotvå år gammal, födde han Hanok.
Och sedan Jered hade fött Hanok, levde han åtta hundra år och
födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Jereds hela ålder nio hundra sextiotvå år; därefter
dog han.

När Hanok var sextiofem år gammal, födde han Metusela.
Och Hanok vandrade i umgängelse med Gud i tre hundra år, sedan
han hade fött Metusela, och han födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Hanoks hela ålder tre hundra sextiofem år.
Sedan Hanok så hade vandrat i umgängelse med Gud, såg man honom
icke mer, ty Gud tog honom bort.

När Metusela var ett hundra åttiosju år gammal, födde han Lemek.
Och sedan Metusela hade fött Lemek, levde han sju hundra
åttiotvå år och födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Metuselas hela ålder nio hundra sextionio år;
därefter dog han.

När Lemek var ett hundra åttiotvå år gammal, födde han en son.
Och han gav honom namnet <spärr>Noa</spärr>, i det han sade:
╜Denne skall <spärr>trösta</spärr> oss vid vårt arbete och
våra händers möda, när vi bruka jorden, som HERREN har
förbannat.╜
Och sedan Lemek hade fött Noa, levde han fem hundra nittiofem år
och födde söner och döttrar.
Alltså blev Lemeks hela ålder sju hundra sjuttiosju år; därefter
dog han.

När Noa var fem hundra år gammal, födde han Sem, Ham och Jafet.

Då nu människorna begynte föröka sig på jorden och döttrar
föddes åt dem
sågo Guds söner att människornas döttrar voro fagra, och de
togo till hustrur dem som de funno mest behag i.
Då sade HERREN: ╜Min ande skall icke bliva kvar i människorna
för beständigt, eftersom de dock äro kött; så vare nu deras tid
bestämd till ett hundra tjugu år.╜

Vid den tiden, likasom ock efteråt, levde jättarna på jorden,
sedan Guds söner begynte gå in till människornas döttrar och
dessa födde barn åt dem; detta var forntidens väldiga män, som
voro så namnkunniga.

Men när HERREN såg att människornas ondska var stor på jorden,
och att deras hjärtans alla uppsåt och tankar beständigt voro
allenast onda,
då ångrade HERREN att han hade gjort människorna på jorden, och
han blev bedrövad i sitt hjärta.
Och HERREN sade: ╜Människorna, som jag skapade, vill jag utplåna
från jorden, ja, både människor och fyrfotadjur och kräldjur och
himmelens fåglar; ty jag ångrar att jag har gjort dem.╜
Men Noa hade funnit nåd för HERRENS ögon.

Detta är berättelsen om Noas släkt.  Noa var en rättfärdig man
och ostrafflig bland sitt släkte; i umgängelse med Gud vandrade
Noa.
Och Noa födde tre söner: Sem, Ham och Jafet.
Men jorden blev alltmer fördärvad för Guds åsyn, och jorden
uppfylldes av våld.
Och Gud såg att jorden var fördärvad, eftersom allt kött
vandrade i fördärv på jorden.

Då sade Gud till Noa: ╜Jag har beslutit att göra ände på allt
kött, ty jorden är uppfylld av våld som de öva; se, jag vill
fördärva dem tillika med jorden.
Så gör dig nu en ark av goferträ, och inred arken med kamrar,
och bestryk den med jordbeck innan och utan.
Och så skall du göra arken: Den skall vara tre hundra alnar
lång, femtio alnar bred och trettio alnar hög;
en öppning för ljuset, en aln hög alltigenom, skall du göra
ovantill på arken; och en dörr till arken skall du sätta på dess
sida; och du skall inreda den så, att den får en undervåning, en
mellanvåning och en övervåning.
Ty se, jag skall låta floden komma med vatten över jorden, till
att fördärva allt kött som har i sig någon livsande, under
himmelen; allt som finnes på jorden skall förgås.
Men med dig vill jag upprätta ett förbund: du skall gå in i
arken med dina söner och din hustru och dina söners hustrur.
Och av allt levande, vad kött det vara må, skall du föra in i
arken ett par av vart slag, för att behålla dem vid liv med dig;
hankön och honkön skola de vara.
Av fåglarna, efter deras arter, av fyrfotadjuren, efter deras
arter, av alla kräldjur på marken, efter deras arter, skall ett
par av vart slag gå in till dig, för att du må behålla dem vid
liv.
Och du skall taga till dig alla slags livsmedel, sådant som kan
ätas, och samla det till dig, för att det må vara dig och dem
till föda.

Och Noa gjorde så; han gjorde i alla stycken såsom Gud hade
bjudit honom.

Och HERREN sade till Noa: ╜Gå in i arken med hela ditt hus, ty
dig har jag funnit rättfärdig inför mig bland detta släkte.
Av alla rena fyrfotadjur skall du taga till dig sju par, hanne
och hona, men av sådana fyrfotadjur som icke äro rena ett par,
hanne och hona,
sammalunda av himmelens fåglar sju par, hankön och honkön, för
att behålla deras släkten vid liv på hela jorden.
Ty sju dagar härefter skall jag låta det regna på jorden, i
fyrtio dagar och fyrtio nätter, och jag skall utplåna från
jorden alla varelser som jag har gjort.╜
Och Noa gjorde i alla stycken såsom HERREN hade bjudit honom.

Noa var sex hundra år gammal, när floden kom med sitt vatten
över jorden.
Och Noa gick in i arken med sina söner och sin hustru och sina
söners hustrur, undan flodens vatten.
Och av fyrfotadjur, både rena och orena, och av fåglar och av
allt som krälar på marken
gingo två och två, hankön och honkön, in till Noa i arken, såsom
Gud hade bjudit Noa.
Och efter de sju dagarna kom flodens vatten över jorden.

I det år då Noa var sex hundra år gammal, i andra månaden, på
sjuttonde dagen i månaden, den dagen bröto alla det stora
djupets källor fram, och himmelens fönster öppnade sig,
och ett regn kom över jorden i fyrtio dagar och fyrtio nätter.
På denna samma dag gick Noa in i arken, så ock Sem, Ham och
Jafet, Noas söner, vidare Noas hustru och hans söners tre
hustrur med dem,
därtill alla vilda djur, efter sina arter, och alla boskapsdjur,
efter sina arter, och alla kräldjur som röra sig på jorden,
efter sina arter, och alla flygande djur, efter sina arter, allt
vad fåglar heter, av alla slag.
De gingo in till Noa i arken, två och två av allt kött som hade
i sig någon livsande.
Och de som gingo ditin voro hankön och honkön av allt slags
kött, såsom Gud hade bjudit honom.

Och HERREN stängde igen om honom.
Och floden kom över jorden i fyrtio dagar, och vattnet förökade
sig och lyfte arken, så att den flöt högt uppe över jorden.
Och vattnet steg och förökade sig mycket på jorden, och arken
drev på vattnet.
Och vattnet steg mer och mer över jorden, och alla höga berg
allestädes under himmelen övertäcktes.
Femton alnar högt steg vattnet över bergen, så att de
övertäcktes.
Då förgicks allt kött som rörde sig på jorden, fåglar och
boskapsdjur och vilda djur och alla smådjur som rörde sig på
jorden, så ock alla människor.
Allt som fanns på det torra omkom, allt som där hade en fläkt av
livsande i sin näsa.
Så utplånade han alla varelser på jorden, både människor och
fyrfotadjur och kräldjur och himmelens fåglar; de utplånades
från jorden, och allenast Noa räddades, jämte det som var med
honom i arken.
Och vattnet fortfor att stiga över jorden i hundra femtio
dagar.
Då tänkte Gud på Noa och på alla de vilda djur och alla de
boskapsdjur som voro med honom i arken.  Och Gud lät en vind gå
fram över jorden, så att vattnet sjönk undan;
och djupets källor och himmelens fönster tillslötos, och regnet
från himmelen upphörde.
Och vattnet vek bort ifrån jorden mer och mer; efter hundra
femtio dagar begynte vattnet avtaga.
Och i sjunde månaden, på sjuttonde dagen i månaden, stannade
arken på Ararats berg.
Och vattnet avtog mer och mer intill tionde månaden.  I tionde
månaden, på första dagen i månaden, blevo bergstopparna synliga.
Och efter fyrtio dagar öppnade Noa fönstret som han hade gjort
på arken,
och lät en korp flyga ut; denne flög fram och åter, till dess
vattnet hade torkat bort ifrån jorden.
Sedan lät han en duva flyga ut, för att få se om vattnet hade
sjunkit undan från marken.
Men duvan fann ingen plats där hon kunde vila sin fot, utan kom
tillbaka till honom i arken, ty vatten betäckte hela jorden.  Då
räckte han ut sin hand och tog henne in till sig i arken.
Sedan väntade han ännu ytterligare sju dagar och lät så duvan än
en gång flyga ut ur arken.
Och duvan kom till honom mot aftonen, och se, då hade hon ett
friskt olivlöv i sin näbb.  Då förstod Noa att vattnet hade
sjunkit undan från jorden.
Men han väntade ännu ytterligare sju dagar och lät så duvan åter
flyga ut; då kom hon icke mer tillbaka till honom.

I det sexhundraförsta året, i första månaden, på första dagen i
månaden, hade vattnet sinat bort ifrån jorden.  Då tog Noa av
taket på arken och såg nu att marken var fri ifrån vatten.
Och i andra månaden, på tjugusjunde dagen i månaden, var jorden
alldeles torr.
Då talade Gud till Noa och sade:
╜Gå ut ur arken med din hustru och dina söner och dina söners
hustrur.
Alla djur som du har hos dig, vad slags kött det vara må, både
fåglar och fyrfotadjur och alla kräldjur som röra sig på
jorden, skall du låta gå ut med dig, för att de må växa till på
jorden och vara fruktsamma och föröka sig på jorden.╜
Så gick då Noa ut med sina söner och sin hustru och sina söners
hustrur.
Och alla fyrfotadjur, alla kräldjur och alla fåglar, alla slags
djur som röra sig på jorden, gingo ut ur arken, efter sina
släkten.

Och Noa byggde ett altare åt HERREN och tog av alla rena
fyrfotadjur och av alla rena fåglar och offrade brännoffer på
altaret.
När HERREN kände den välbehagliga lukten, sade han vid sig
själv: ╜Jag skall härefter icke mer förbanna marken för
människans skull, eftersom ju människans hjärtas uppsåt är ont
allt ifrån ungdomen.  Och jag skall härefter icke mer dräpa allt
levande, såsom jag nu har gjort.
Så länge jorden består, skola härefter sådd och skörd, köld och
värme, sommar och vinter, dag och natt aldrig upphöra.╜
Och Gud välsignade Noa och hans söner och sade till dem: ╜Varen
fruktsamma och föröken eder, och uppfyllen jorden.
Och må fruktan och förskräckelse för eder komma över alla djur
på jorden och alla fåglar under himmelen; jämte allt som krälar
på marken och alla fiskar i havet vare de givna i eder hand.
Allt som rör sig och har liv skolen I hava till föda; såsom jag
har givit eder gröna örter, så giver jag eder allt detta.
Kött som har i sig sin själ, det är sitt blod, skolen I dock
icke äta.
Men edert eget blod, vari eder själ är, skall jag utkräva.  Jag
skall utkräva det av vilket djur det vara må.  Jag skall ock av
den ena människan utkräva den andres själ;
den som utgjuter människoblod, hans blod skall av människor
bliva utgjutet, ty Gud har gjort människan till sin avbild.
Och varen I fruktsamma och föröken eder; växen till på jorden
och föröken eder på den.╜

Ytterligare sade Gud till Noa och till hans söner med honom:
╜Se, jag vill upprätta ett förbund med eder, och med edra
efterkommande efter eder,
och med alla levande varelser som I haven hos eder: fåglar,
boskapsdjur och alla vilda djur hos eder, alla jordens djur som
hava gått ut ur arken.
Jag vill upprätta ett förbund med eder: härefter skall icke mer
ske att allt kött utrotas genom flodens vatten; ingen flod skall
mer komma och fördärva jorden.╜
Och Gud sade: ╜Detta skall vara tecknet till det förbund som jag
gör mellan mig och eder, jämte alla levande varelser hos eder,
för eviga tider:
min båge sätter jag i skyn; den skall vara tecknet till
förbundet mellan mig och jorden.
Och när jag härefter låter skyar stiga upp över jorden och bågen
då synes i skyn,
skall jag tänka på det förbund som har blivit slutet mellan mig
och eder, jämte alla levande varelser, vad slags kött det vara
må; och vattnet skall då icke mer bliva en flod som fördärvar
allt kött.
När alltså bågen synes i skyn och jag ser på den, skall jag
tänka på det eviga förbund som har blivit slutet mellan Gud och
alla levande varelser, vad slags kött det vara må på jorden.╜
Så sade nu Gud till Noa: ╜Detta skall vara tecknet till det
förbund som jag har upprättat mellan mig och allt kött på
jorden.╜

Noas söner, som gingo ut ur arken, voro Sem, Ham och Jafet; men
Ham var Kanaans fader.
Dessa tre voro Noas söner och från dessa hava alla jordens folk
utgrenat sig.

Och Noa var en åkerman och var den förste som planterade en
vingård.
Men när han drack av vinet, blev han drucken och låg blottad i
sitt tält.
Och Ham, Kanaans fader, såg då sin faders blygd och berättade
det för sina båda bröder, som voro utanför.
Men Sem och Jafet togo en mantel och lade den på sina skuldror,
båda tillsammans, och gingo så baklänges in och täckte över sin
faders blygd; de höllo därvid sina ansikten bortvända, så att de
icke sågo sin faders blygd.
När sedan Noa vaknade upp från ruset och fick veta vad hans
yngste son hade gjort honom, sade han:
╜Förbannad vare Kanaan,
  en trälars träl vare han åt sina bröder!╜
Ytterligare sade han:
  ╜Välsignad vare HERREN, Sems Gud,
  och Kanaan vare deras träl!
Gud utvidge Jafet,
  han tage sin boning i Sems hyddor,
  och Kanaan vare deras träl.╜

Och Noa levde efter floden tre hundra femtio år;
alltså blev Noas hela ålder nio hundra femtio år; därefter dog
han.
Detta är berättelsen om Noas söners släkt.  De voro Sem, Ham och
Jafet; och åt dem föddes söner efter floden.

Jafets söner voro Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Mesek och
Tiras.
Gomers söner voro Askenas, Rifat och Togarma.
Javans söner voro Elisa och Tarsis, kittéerna och dodanéerna.
Från dessa hava inbyggarna i hedningarnas Havsländer utbrett sig
i sina länder, var efter sitt tungomål, efter sina släkter, i
sina folk.

Hams söner voro Kus, Misraim, Put och Kanaan.
Kus' söner voro Seba, Havila, Sabta, Raema och Sabteka.  Raemas
söner voro Saba och Dedan.

Men Kus födde Nimrod; han var den förste som upprättade ett
välde på jorden.
Han var ock en väldig jägare inför HERREN; därför plägar man
säga: ╜En väldig jägare inför HERREN såsom Nimrod.╜
Och hans rike hade sin begynnelse i Babel, Erek, Ackad och
Kalne, i Sinears land.
Från det landet drog han sedan ut till Assyrien och byggde
Nineve, Rehobot-Ir och Kela,
och därtill Resen mellan Nineve och Kela; detta är ╜den stora
staden╜.

Och Misraim födde ludéerna, anaméerna, lehabéerna, naftuhéerna,
patroséerna, kasluhéerna, från vilka filistéerna hava utgått,
och kaftoréerna.
Och Kanaan födde Sidon, som var hans förstfödde, och Het,
så ock jebuséerna, amoréerna, girgaséerna,
hivéerna, arkéerna, sinéerna,
arvadéerna, semaréerna och hamatéerna.  Sedan utgrenade sig
kananéernas släkter allt vidare,
så att kananéernas område sträckte sig från Sidon fram emot
Gerar ända till Gasa, och fram emot Sodom, Gomorra, Adma och
Seboim ända till Lesa.

Dessa voro Hams söner, efter deras släkter och tungomål, i deras
länder och folk.
Söner föddes ock åt Sem, Jafets äldre broder, som blev stamfader
för alla Ebers söner.
Sems söner voro Elam, Assur, Arpaksad, Lud och Aram.
Arams söner voro Us, Hul, Geter och Mas.
Arpaksad födde Sela, och Sela födde Eber.
Men åt Eber föddes två söner; den ene hette
<spärr>Peleg</spärr>, ty i hans tid blev jorden fördelad; och
hans broder hette Joktan.
Och Joktan födde Almodad, Selef, Hasarmavet, Jera,
Hadoram, Usal, Dikla,
Obal, Abimael, Saba,
Ofir, Havila och Jobab; alla dessa voro Joktans söner.
Och de hade sina boningsorter från Mesa fram emot Sefar, emot
Östra berget.
Dessa voro Sems söner, efter deras släkter och tungomål, i deras
länder, efter deras folk.

Dessa voro Noas söners släkter, efter deras ättföljd, i deras
folk.  Och från dem hava folken efter floden utbrett sig på
jorden.

Och hela jorden hade enahanda tungomål och talade på enahanda
sätt.
Men när de bröto upp och drogo österut, funno de en lågslätt i
Sinears land och bosatte sig där.
Och de sade till varandra: ╜Kom, låt oss slå tegel och bränna
det.╜  Och teglet begagnade de såsom sten, och såsom murbruk
begagnade de jordbeck.
Och de sade: ╜Kom, låt oss bygga en stad åt oss och ett torn
vars spets räcker upp i himmelen, och så göra oss ett namn; vi
kunde eljest bliva kringspridda över hela jorden.╜
Då steg HERREN ned för att se staden och tornet som
människobarnen byggde.
Och HERREN sade: ╜Se, de äro ett enda folk och hava alla enahanda
tungomål, och detta är deras första tilltag; härefter skall
intet bliva dem omöjligt, vad de än besluta att göra.
Välan, låt oss stiga dit ned och förbistra deras tungomål, så
att den ene icke förstår den andres tungomål.╜
Och så spridde HERREN dem därifrån ut över hela jorden, så att
de måste upphöra att bygga på staden.
Därav fick den namnet Babel, eftersom HERREN där
<spärr>förbistrade</spärr> hela jordens tungomål; därifrån
spridde ock HERREN ut dem över hela jorden.

Detta är berättelsen om Sems släkt.  När Sem var hundra år
gammal, födde han Arpaksad, två år efter floden.
Och sedan Sem hade fött Arpaksad, levde han fem hundra år och
födde söner och döttrar.
När Arpaksad var trettiofem år gammal, födde han Sela.
Och sedan Arpaksad hade fött Sela, levde han fyra hundra tre år
och födde söner och döttrar.
När Sela var trettio år gammal, födde han Eber.
Och sedan Sela hade fött Eber, levde han fyra hundra tre år och
födde söner och döttrar.
När Eber var trettiofyra år gammal, födde han Peleg.
Och sedan Eber hade fött Peleg, levde han fyra hundra trettio år
och födde söner och döttrar.
När Peleg var trettio år gammal, födde han Regu.
Och sedan Peleg hade fött Regu, levde han två hundra nio år och
födde söner och döttrar.
När Regu var trettiotvå år gammal, födde han Serug.
Och sedan Regu hade fött Serug, levde han två hundra sju år och
födde söner och döttrar.
När Serug var trettio år gammal, födde han Nahor.
Och sedan Serug hade fött Nahor, levde han två hundra år och
födde söner och döttrar.
När Nahor var tjugunio år gammal, födde han Tera.
Och sedan Nahor hade fött Tera, levde han ett hundra nitton år
och födde söner och döttrar.
När Tera var sjuttio år gammal, födde han Abram, Nahor och
Haran.

Och detta är berättelsen om Teras släkt.  Tera födde Abram,
Nahor och Haran.  Och Haran födde Lot.
Och Haran dog hos sin fader Tera i sitt fädernesland, i det
kaldeiska Ur.
Och Abram och Nahor togo sig hustrur; Abrams hustru hette Sarai,
och Nahors hustru hette Milka, dotter till Haran, som var fader
till Milka och Jiska.
Men Sarai var ofruktsam och hade inga barn.
Och Tera tog med sig sin son Abram och sin sonson Lot, Harans
son, och sin sonhustru Sarai, som var hans son Abrams hustru;
och de drogo tillsammans ut från det kaldeiska Ur på väg till
Kanaans land; men när de kommo till Haran, bosatte de sig där.
Och Teras ålder blev två hundra fem år; därefter dog Tera i
Haran.

Och HERREN sade till Abram: ╜Gå ut ur ditt land och från din
släkt och från din faders hus, bort till det land som jag skall
visa dig.
Så skall jag göra dig till ett stort folk; jag skall välsigna
dig och göra ditt namn stort, och du skall bliva en välsignelse.
Och jag skall välsigna dem som välsigna dig, och den som
förbannar dig skall jag förbanna, och i dig skola alla släkter
på jorden varda välsignade.╜
Och Abram gick åstad, såsom HERREN hade tillsagt honom, och Lot
gick med honom.  Och Abram var sjuttiofem år gammal, när han drog
ut från Haran.
Och Abram tog sin hustru Sarai och sin brorson Lot och alla
ägodelar som de hade förvärvat och tjänarna som de hade skaffat
sig i Haran; och de drogo åstad på väg mot Kanaans land
och kommo så till Kanaans land.

Och Abram drog fram i landet ända till den heliga platsen vid
Sikem, till Mores terebint.  Och på den tiden bodde kananéerna
där i landet.
Men HERREN uppenbarade sig för Abram och sade: ╜Åt din säd skall
jag giva detta land.╜  Då byggde han där ett altare åt HERREN,
som hade uppenbarat sig för honom.
Sedan flyttade han därifrån till bergsbygden öster om Betel och
slog där upp sitt tält, så att han hade Betel i väster och Ai i
öster; och han byggde där ett altare åt HERREN och åkallade
HERRENS namn.
Sedan bröt Abram upp därifrån och drog sig allt längre mot
Sydlandet.

Men hungersnöd uppstod i landet, och Abram drog ned till Egypten
för att bo där någon tid, eftersom hungersnöden var så svår i
landet.
Men när han nalkades Egypten sade han till sin hustru Sarai:
╜Jag vet ju att du är en skön kvinna.
Om nu egyptierna tänka, när de få se dig: 'Hon är hans hustru',
så skola de dräpa mig, under det att de låta dig leva.
Säg därför att du är min syster, så att det går mig väl för din
skull, och så att jag för din skull får leva.╜
Då nu Abram kom till Egypten, sågo egyptierna att hon var en
mycket skön kvinna.
Och när Faraos hövdingar fingo se henne, prisade de henne för
Farao, och så blev kvinnan tagen in i Faraos hus.
Och Abram blev av honom väl behandlad för hennes skull, så att
han fick får, fäkreatur och åsnor, tjänare och tjänarinnor,
åsninnor och kameler.
Men HERREN hemsökte Farao och hans hus med stora plågor för
Sarais, Abrams hustrus, skull.
Då kallade Farao Abram till sig och sade: ╜Vad har du gjort mot
mig!  Varför lät du mig icke veta att hon var din hustru?
Varför sade du: 'Hon är min syster' och vållade så, att jag tog
henne till hustru åt mig?  Se, här har du nu din hustru, tag
henne och gå.╜
Och Farao gav sina män befallning om honom, att de skulle
ledsaga honom till vägs med hans hustru och allt vad han ägde.
Så drog då Abram upp från Egypten med sin hustru och allt vad
han ägde, och Lot jämte honom, till Sydlandet.
Och Abram var mycket rik på boskap och på silver och guld.
Och han färdades ifrån lägerplats till lägerplats och kom så
från Sydlandet ända till Betel, till det ställe där hans tält
förut hade stått, mellan Betel och Ai,
dit där han förra gången hade rest ett altare.  Och där åkallade
Abram HERRENS namn.

Men Lot, som drog med Abram, hade också får och fäkreatur och
tält.
Och landet räckte icke till för dem, så att de kunde bo
tillsammans; ty deras ägodelar voro för stora för att de skulle
kunna bo tillsammans;
och tvister uppstodo mellan Abrams och Lots boskapsherdar.
Tillika bodde på den tiden kananéerna och perisséerna där i
landet.
Då sade Abram till Lot: ╜Icke skall någon tvist vara mellan mig
och dig, och mellan mina herdar och dina herdar; vi äro ju
fränder.
Ligger icke hela landet öppet för dig?  Skilj dig ifrån mig;
vill du åt vänster, så går jag åt höger, och vill du åt höger, så
går jag åt vänster.╜
Då lyfte Lot upp sina ögon och såg att hela Jordanslätten
överallt var vattenrik.  Innan HERREN fördärvade Sodom och
Gomorra, var den nämligen såsom HERRENS lustgård, såsom Egyptens
land, ända fram emot Soar.
Så utvalde då Lot åt sig hela Jordanslätten.  Och Lot bröt upp
och drog österut, och de skildes så från varandra.
Abram förblev boende i Kanaans land, och Lot bodde i städerna på
Slätten och drog med sina tält ända inemot Sodom.
Men folket i Sodom var mycket ont och syndigt inför HERREN.

Och HERREN sade till Abram, sedan Lot hade skilt sig från honom:
╜Lyft upp dina ögon och se, från den plats där du står, mot norr
och söder och öster och väster.╜
Ty hela det land som du nu ser skall jag giva åt dig och din säd
för evärdlig tid.
Och jag skall låta din säd bliva såsom stoftet på jorden; kan
någon räkna stoftet på jorden, så skall ock din säd kunna
räknas.
Stå upp och drag igenom landet efter dess längd och dess bredd,
ty åt dig skall jag giva det.╜
Och Abram drog åstad med sina tält och kom och bosatte sig vid
Mamres terebintlund invid Hebron; och han byggde där ett altare
åt HERREN.
På den tid då Amrafel var konung i Sinear, Arjok konung i
Ellasar, Kedorlaomer konung i Elam och Tideal konung över Goim,
hände sig
att dessa begynte krig mot Bera, konungen i Sodom, Birsa,
konungen i Gomorra, Sinab, konungen i Adma, Semeber, konungen i
Seboim, och mot konungen i Bela, det är Soar.
De förenade sig alla och tågade till Siddimsdalen, där Salthavet
nu är.
I tolv år hade de varit under Kedorlaomer, men i det trettonde
året hade de avfallit.
Så kom nu i det fjortonde året Kedorlaomer med de konungar som
voro på hans sida; och de slogo rafaéerna i Asterot-Karnaim,
suséerna i Ham, eméerna i Save-Kirjataim
och horéerna på deras berg Seir och drevo dem ända till El-Paran
vid öknen.
Sedan vände de om och kommo till En-Mispat, det är Kades, och
härjade amalekiternas hela land; de slogo ock amoréerna som
bodde i Hasason-Tamar.
Då drogo konungen i Sodom, konungen i Gomorra, konungen i Adma,
konungen i Seboim och konungen i Bela, det är Soar, ut och
ställde upp sig i Siddimsdalen till strid mot dem --
mot Kedorlaomer, konungen i Elam, Tideal, konungen över Goim,
Amrafel, konungen i Sinear, och Arjok, konungen i Ellasar, fyra
konungar mot de fem.
Men Siddimsdalen var full av jordbecksgropar.  Och konungarna i
Sodom och Gomorra måste fly och föllo då i dessa, och de som
kommo undan flydde till bergsbygden.
Så togo de allt gods som fanns i Sodom och Gomorra, och alla
livsmedel där, och tågade bort;
de togo ock med sig Lot, Abrams brorson, och hans ägodelar, när
de tågade bort; ty denne bodde i Sodom.
Men en av de räddade kom och berättade detta för Abram, hebréen;
denne bodde vid den terebintlund som tillhörde amoréen Mamre,
Eskols och Aners broder, och dessa voro i förbund med Abram.
Då nu Abram hörde att hans frände var fången, lät han sina mest
beprövade tjänare, sådana som voro födda i hans hus, tre hundra
aderton män, rycka ut, och förföljde fienderna ända till Dan.
Och han delade sitt folk och överföll dem så om natten med sina
tjänare och slog dem, och förföljde dem sedan ända till Hoba,
norr om Damaskus,
och tog tillbaka allt godset; sin frände Lot och hans ägodelar
tog han ock tillbaka, ävensom kvinnorna och det övriga folket.

Då han nu var på återvägen, sedan han hade slagit Kedorlaomer
och de konungar som voro på hans sida, gick konungen i Sodom
honom till mötes i Savedalen, det är Konungsdalen.
Och Melki-Sedek, konungen i Salem, lät bära ut bröd och vin;
denne var präst åt Gud den Högste.
Och han välsignade honom och sade: ╜Välsignad vare Abram av Gud
den Högste, himmelens och jordens skapare!
Och välsignad vare Gud den Högste, som har givit dina ovänner i
din hand!╜  Och Abram gav honom tionde av allt.
Och konungen i Sodom sade till Abram: ╜Giv mig folket; godset må
du behålla för dig själv.╜
Men Abram svarade konungen i Sodom: ╜Jag lyfter min hand upp
till HERREN, till Gud den Högste, himmelens och jordens skapare,
och betygar
att jag icke vill taga ens en tråd eller en skorem, än mindre
något annat som tillhör dig.  Du skall icke kunna säga: 'Jag har
riktat Abram.'
Jag vill intet hava; det är nog med vad mina män hava förtärt
och den del som tillkommer mina följeslagare.  Aner, Eskol och
Mamre, de må få sin del.╜
En tid härefter kom HERRENS ord i en syn till Abram; han sade:
╜Frukta icke, Abram, jag är din sköld, din lön skall bliva
mycket stor.╜
Men Abram sade: ╜Herre, HERRE, vad vill du då giva mig?  Jag går
ju barnlös bort, och arvinge till mitt hus bliver en man från
Damaskus, Elieser.╜
Och Abram sade ytterligare: ╜Mig har du icke givit någon
livsfrukt; en av mitt husfolk skall bliva min arvinge.╜
Men se, HERRENS ord kom till honom; han sade: ╜Nej, denne skall
icke bliva din arvinge, utan en som utgår från ditt eget liv
skall bliva din arvinge.╜
Och han förde honom ut och sade: ╜Skåda upp till himmelen, och
räkna stjärnorna, om du kan räkna dem.╜  Och han sade till
honom: ╜Så skall din säd bliva.╜
Och han trodde på HERREN; och han räknade honom det till
rättfärdighet.

Och han sade till honom: ╜Jag är HERREN, som har fört dig ut
från det kaldeiska Ur för att giva dig detta land till
besittning.╜
Han svarade: ╜Herre, HERRE, varav skall jag veta att jag skall
besitta det?╜
Då sade han till honom: ╜Tag åt mig en treårig kviga, en treårig
get och en treårig vädur, därtill en turturduva och en ung
duva.╜
Och han tog åt honom alla dessa djur och styckade dem mitt itu
och lade styckena mitt emot varandra; dock styckade han icke
fåglarna.
Och rovfåglarna slogo ned på de döda kropparna, men Abram drev
bort dem.

När nu solen var nära att gå ned och en tung sömn hade fallit på
Abram, se, då kom en förskräckelse över honom och ett stort
mörker.
Och han sade till Abram: ╜Det skall du veta, att din säd skall
komma att leva såsom främlingar i ett land som icke tillhör dem,
och de skola där vara trälar, och man skall förtrycka dem; så
skall ske i fyra hundra år.╜
Men det folk vars trälar de bliva skall jag ock döma.  Sedan
skola de draga ut med stora ägodelar.
Men du själv skall gå till dina fäder i frid och bliva begraven
i en god ålder.
Och i det fjärde släktet skall din säd komma hit tillbaka.  Ty
ännu hava icke amoréerna fyllt sin missgärnings mått.╜

Då nu solen hade gått ned och det hade blivit alldeles mörkt,
syntes en rykande ugn med flammande låga, som for fram mellan
styckena.
På den dagen slöt HERREN ett förbund med Abram och sade: ╜Åt din
säd skall jag giva detta land, från Egyptens flod ända till den
stora floden, till floden Frat:
kainéernas, kenaséernas, kadmonéernas,
hetiternas, perisséernas, rafaéernas,
amoréernas, kananéernas, girgaséernas och jebuséernas land.╜
Och Sarai, Abrams hustru, hade icke fött barn åt honom.  Men hon
hade en egyptisk tjänstekvinna, som hette Hagar;
och Sarai sade till Abram: ╜Se, HERREN har gjort mig ofruktsam,
så att jag icke föder barn; gå in till min tjänstekvinna,
kanhända skall jag få avkomma genom henne.╜  Abram lyssnade till
Sarais ord;
och Sarai, Abrams hustru, tog sin egyptiska tjänstekvinna Hagar
och gav henne till hustru åt sin man Abram, sedan denne hade
bott tio år i Kanaans land.
Och han gick in till Hagar, och hon blev havande.  När hon nu
såg att hon var havande, ringaktade hon sin fru.
Då sade Sarai till Abram: ╜Den orätt mig sker komme över dig.
Jag själv lade min tjänstekvinna i din famn, men då hon nu ser
att hon är havande, ringaktar hon mig.  HERREN döme mellan mig
och dig.╜
Abram sade till Sarai: ╜Din tjänstekvinna är ju i din hand, gör
med henne vad du finner för gott.╜  När då Sarai tuktade henne,
flydde hon bort ifrån henne.

Men HERRENS ängel kom emot henne vid en vattenkälla i öknen, den
källa som ligger vid vägen till Sur.
Och han sade: ╜Hagar, Sarais tjänstekvinna, varifrån kommer du,
och vart går du?╜  Hon svarade: ╜Jag är stadd på flykt ifrån min
fru Sarai.╜
Då sade HERRENS ängel till henne: ╜Vänd tillbaka till din fru,
och ödmjuka dig under henne.╜
Och HERRENS ängel sade till henne: ╜Jag skall göra din säd
mycket talrik, så att man icke skall kunna räkna den för dess
myckenhets skull.╜
Ytterligare sade HERRENS ängel till henne: ╜Se, du är havande
och skall föda en son; honom skall du giva namnet Ismael,
därför att HERREN har hört ditt lidande.
Och han skall bliva lik en vildåsna; hans hand skall vara emot
var man, och var mans hand emot honom; och han skall ligga i
strid med alla sina bröder.╜
Och hon gav HERREN, som hade talat med henne, ett namn, i det
hon sade: ╜Du är Seendets Gud.╜  Hon tänkte nämligen: ╜Har jag
då verkligen här fått se en skymt av <spärr>honom som ser
mig</spärr>?╜
Därav kallades brunnen Beer-Lahai-Roi; den ligger mellan Kades
och Bered.

Och Hagar födde åt Abram en son; och Abram gav den son som Hagar
hade fött åt honom namnet Ismael.
Och Abram var åttiosex år gammal, när Hagar födde Ismael åt
Abram.

När Abram var nittionio år gammal, uppenbarade sig HERREN för
honom och sade till honom: ╜Jag är Gud den Allsmäktige.  Vandra
inför mig och var ostrafflig.
Jag vill göra ett förbund mellan mig och dig, och jag skall
föröka dig övermåttan.╜
Då föll Abram ned på sitt ansikte, och Gud talade så med honom:
╜Se, det förbund som jag å min sida gör med dig är detta, att du
skall bliva en fader till många folk.
Därför skall du icke mer heta Abram, utan
<spärr>Abraham</spärr> skall vara ditt namn, ty jag skall
låta dig bliva en fader till många folk.
Och jag skall göra dig övermåttan fruktsam och låta folkslag
komma av dig, och konungar skola utgå från dig.
Och jag skall upprätta ett förbund mellan mig och dig och din
säd efter dig, från släkte till släkte, ett evigt förbund, så
att jag skall vara din Gud och din säds efter dig;
och jag skall giva dig och din säd efter dig det land där du nu
bor såsom främling, hela Kanaans land, till evärdlig besittning,
och jag skall vara deras Gud.
Och Gud sade ytterligare till Abraham: ╜Du åter skall hålla mitt
förbund, du och din säd efter dig, från släkte till släkte.╜
Och detta är det förbund mellan mig och eder och din säd efter
dig, som I skolen hålla: allt mankön bland eder skall omskäras;
på eder förhud skolen I omskäras, och detta skall vara tecknet
till förbundet mellan mig och eder.
Släkte efter släkte skall vart gossebarn bland eder omskäras,
när det är åtta dagar gammalt, jämväl den hemfödde tjänaren och
den som är köpt för penningar från något främmande folk, och som
icke är av din säd.
Omskäras skall både din hemfödde tjänare och den som du har köpt
för penningar; och så skall mitt förbund vara på edert kött
betygat såsom ett evigt förbund.
Men en oomskuren av mankön, en vilkens förhud icke har blivit
omskuren, han skall utrotas ur sin släkt; han har brutit mitt
förbund.╜

Och Gud sade åter till Abraham: ╜Din hustru Sarai skall du icke
mer kalla Sarai, utan <spärr>Sara</spärr> skall vara hennes
namn.
Och jag skall välsigna henne och skall också med henne giva dig
en son; ja, jag skall välsigna henne, och folkslag skola komma
av henne, konungar över folk skola härstamma från henne.╜
Då föll Abraham ned på sitt ansikte och log, ty han sade vid sig
själv: ╜Skulle barn födas åt en man som är hundra år gammal?
Och skulle Sara föda barn, hon som är nittio år gammal?╜
Och Abraham sade till Gud: ╜Måtte allenast Ismael få leva inför
dig!╜
Då sade Gud: ╜Nej, din hustru Sara skall föda dig en son, och du
skall giva honom namnet Isak; och med honom skall jag upprätta
mitt förbund, ett evigt förbund, som skall gälla hans säd efter
honom.
Men angående Ismael har jag ock hört din bön; se, jag skall
välsigna honom och göra honom fruktsam och föröka honom
övermåttan.  Tolv hövdingar skall han få till söner, och jag
skall göra honom till ett stort folk.
Men mitt förbund skall jag upprätta med Isak, honom som Sara
skall föda åt dig vid denna tid nästa år.╜
Då Gud nu hade talat ut med Abraham, for han upp från honom.

Och Abraham tog sin son Ismael och alla sina tjänare, de
hemfödda och de som voro köpta för penningar, allt mankön bland
Abrahams husfolk, och omskar på denna samma dag deras förhud,
såsom Gud hade tillsagt honom.
Och Abraham var nittionio år gammal, när hans förhud blev
omskuren.
Och hans son Ismael var tretton år gammal, när hans förhud blev
omskuren.
På denna samma dag omskuros Abraham och hans son Ismael;
och alla män i hans hus, de hemfödda tjänarna och de som voro
köpta för penningar ifrån främmande folk, blevo omskurna tillika
med honom.

Och HERREN uppenbarade sig för honom vid Mamres terebintlund, där
han satt vid ingången till sitt tält, då det var som hetast på
dagen.
När han lyfte upp sina ögon, fick han se tre män stå framför sig.
Och då han såg dem, skyndade han emot dem från tältets ingång och
bugade sig ned till jorden
och sade: ╜Herre, har jag funnit nåd för dina ögon, så gå icke
förbi din tjänare.
Låt mig hämta litet vatten, så att I kunnen två edra fötter; och
vilen eder under trädet.
Jag vill ock hämta ett stycke bröd, så att I kunnen vederkvicka
eder, innan I gån vidare, eftersom I nu haven tagit vägen förbi
eder tjänare.╜  De sade: ╜Gör såsom du har sagt.╜
Och Abraham skyndade in i tältet till Sara och sade: ╜Skynda dig
och tag tre sea-mått fint mjöl, knåda det och baka kakor.╜
Men själv hastade Abraham bort till boskapen och tog en god
ungkalv och gav den åt sin tjänare, och denne skyndade sig att
tillreda den.
Och han tog gräddmjölk och söt mjölk och kalven, som han hade
låtit tillreda, och satte fram för dem; och han stod själv hos
dem under trädet, medan de åto.

Och de sade till honom: ╜Var är din hustru Sara?╜  Han svarade:
╜Därinne i tältet.╜
Då sade han: ╜Jag skall komma tillbaka till dig nästa år vid
denna tid, och se, då skall din hustru Sara hava en son.╜  Detta
hörde Sara, där hon stod i ingången till tältet, som var bakom
honom.
Men Abraham och Sara voro gamla och komna till hög ålder, och
Sara hade icke mer, såsom kvinnor pläga hava.
Därför log Sara vid sig själv och tänkte: ╜Skulle jag väl nu på
min ålderdom giva mig till lusta, nu då också min herre är
gammal?╜
Men HERREN sade till Abraham: ╜Varför log Sara och tänkte:
'Skulle jag verkligen föda barn, så gammal som jag är?'
Är då något så underbart, att HERREN icke skulle förmå det?  På
den bestämda tiden skall jag komma tillbaka till dig, vid denna
tid nästa år, och då skall Sara hava en son.╜
Då nekade Sara och sade: ╜Jag log icke╜; ty hon blev förskräckt.
Men han sade: ╜Jo, du log.╜

Och männen stodo upp för att gå därifrån och vände sina blickar
ned mot Sodom, och Abraham gick med för att ledsaga dem.
Och HERREN sade: ╜Kan jag väl dölja för Abraham vad jag tänker
göra?
Av Abraham skall ju bliva ett stort och mäktigt folk, och i
honom skola alla folk på jorden varda välsignade.
Ty därtill har jag utvalt honom, för att han skall bjuda sina
barn och sitt hus efter sig att hålla HERRENS väg och öva
rättfärdighet och rätt, på det att HERREN må låta det komma över
Abraham, som han har lovat honom.╜

Och HERREN sade: ╜Ropet från Sodom och Gomorra är stort, och
deras synd är mycket svår;
därför vill jag gå ditned och se om de verkligen i allt hava
gjort efter det rop som har kommit till mig; om så icke är, vill
jag veta det.╜
Och männen begåvo sig därifrån och gingo mot Sodom; men Abraham
stod ännu kvar inför HERREN.
Och Abraham trädde närmare och sade: ╜Vill du då förgöra den
rättfärdige tillika med den ogudaktige?
Kanhända finnas femtio rättfärdiga i staden; vill du då förgöra
den och icke skona orten för de femtio rättfärdigas skull som
finnas där?
Bort det, att du skulle så göra och döda den rättfärdige tillika
med den ogudaktige, så att det skulle gå den rättfärdige likasom
den ogudaktige; bort det ifrån dig!  Skulle han som är hela
jordens domare icke göra vad rätt är?╜
HERREN sade: ╜Om jag i Sodom finner femtio rättfärdiga inom
staden, så vill jag skona orten för deras skull.╜
Men Abraham svarade och sade: ╜Se, jag har dristat mig att tala
till Herren, fastän jag är stoft och aska.╜
Kanhända skall det fattas fem i de femtio rättfärdiga; vill du
då för de fems skull fördärva hela staden?╜  Han sade: ╜Om jag
där finner fyrtiofem; så skall jag icke fördärva den.╜
Men han fortfor att tala till honom och sade: ╜Kanhända skola
fyrtio finnas där.╜  Han svarade: ╜Jag skall då icke göra det,
för de fyrtios skull.╜
Då sade han: ╜Herre, vredgas icke över att jag ännu talar något.
Kanhända skola trettio finnas där.╜  Han svarade: ╜Om jag där
finner trettio, så skall jag icke göra det.╜
Men han sade: ╜Se, jag har dristat mig att tala till Herren.
Kanhända skola tjugu finnas där.╜  Han svarade: ╜Jag skall då
icke fördärva den, för de tjugus skull.╜
Då sade han: ╜Herre, vredgas icke över att jag talar allenast
ännu en gång.  Kanhända skola tio finnas där.╜  Han svarade: ╜Jag
skall då icke fördärva den, för de tios skull.╜
Och HERREN gick bort, sedan han hade talat ut med Abraham; och
Abraham vände tillbaka hem.
Och de två änglarna kommo om aftonen till Sodom, och Lot satt då
i Sodoms port.  När Lot fick se dem, stod han upp och gick emot
dem och föll ned till jorden på sitt ansikte
och sade: ╜I herrar, tagen härbärge i eder tjänares hus och
stannen där över natten, och tvån edra fötter; sedan kunnen I i
morgon bittida fortsätta eder färd.╜  De svarade: ╜Nej, vi vilja
stanna på gatan över natten.╜
Men han bad dem så enträget, att de togo härbärge hos honom och
kommo in i hans hus.  Och han tillredde en måltid åt dem och
bakade osyrat bröd, och de åto.

Men innan de hade lagt sig, omringades huset av männen i staden,
Sodoms män, både unga och gamla, allt folket, så många de voro.
Dessa kallade på Lot och sade till honom: ╜Var äro de män som
hava kommit till dig i natt?  För dem ut till oss, så att vi få
känna dem.╜
Då gick Lot ut till dem i porten och stängde dörren efter sig
och sade: ╜Mina bröder, gören icke så illa.
Se, jag har två döttrar, som ännu icke veta av någon man.  Dem
vill jag föra ut till eder, så kunnen I göra med dem vad I
finnen för gott.  Gören allenast icke något mot dessa män,
eftersom de nu hava gått in under skuggan av mitt tak.╜
Men de svarade: ╜Bort med dig!╜  Och de sade ytterligare: ╜Denne,
en ensam man, har kommit hit och bor här såsom främling, och han
vill dock ständigt upphäva sig som domare.  Men nu skola vi göra
dig mer ont än dem.╜  Och de trängde med våld in på mannen Lot
och stormade fram för att spränga dörren.
Då räckte männen ut sina händer och togo Lot in till sig i huset
och stängde dörren.
Och de män som stodo utanför husets port slogo de med blindhet,
både små och stora, så att de förgäves sökte finna porten.
Och männen sade till Lot: ╜Har du någon mer här, någon måg,
eller några söner eller döttrar, eller någon annan som tillhör
dig i staden, så för dem bort ifrån detta ställe.
Ty vi skola fördärva detta ställe; ropet från dem har blivit så
stort inför HERREN, att HERREN har utsänt oss till att fördärva
dem.╜
Då gick Lot ut och talade till sina mågar, som skulle få hans
döttrar, och sade: ╜Stån upp och gån bort ifrån detta ställe; ty
HERREN skall fördärva staden.╜  Men hans mågar menade att han
skämtade.

När nu morgonrodnaden gick upp, manade änglarna på Lot och sade:
╜Stå upp och tag med dig din hustru och dina båda döttrar, som
du har hos dig, på det att du icke må förgås genom stadens
missgärning.╜
Och då han ännu dröjde, togo männen honom vid handen jämte hans
hustru och hans båda döttrar, ty HERREN ville skona honom; och
de förde honom ut, och när de voro utanför staden, släppte de
honom.
Och medan de förde dem ut, sade den ene: ╜Fly för ditt livs
skull; se dig icke tillbaka, och dröj ingenstädes på Slätten.
Fly undan till bergen, så att du icke förgås.╜
Men Lot sade till dem: ╜Ack nej, Herre.
Se, din tjänare har ju funnit nåd för dina ögon, och stor är den
barmhärtighet som du gör med mig, då du vill rädda mitt liv; men
jag förmår icke fly undan till bergen; jag rädes att olyckan
hinner mig, så att jag omkommer.
Se, staden därborta ligger helt nära, och det är lätt att fly
dit, och den är liten; låt mig fly undan dit -- den är ju så
liten -- på det att jag må bliva vid liv.╜
Då svarade han honom: ╜Välan, jag skall ock häri göra dig till
viljes; jag skall icke omstörta den stad som du talar om.
Men skynda att fly undan dit; ty jag kan intet göra, förrän du
har kommit dit.╜  Därav fick staden namnet
<spärr>Soar</spärr>.

Då nu solen hade gått upp över jorden och Lot hade kommit till
Soar,
lät HERREN svavel och eld regna från himmelen, från HERREN, över
Sodom och Gomorra;
och han omstörtade dessa städer med hela Slätten och alla dem
som bodde i städerna och det som växte på marken.
Och Lots hustru, som följde efter honom, såg sig tillbaka; då
blev hon en saltstod.
Och när Abraham bittida följande morgon gick till den plats där
han hade stått inför HERREN,
och blickade ned över Sodom och Gomorra och över hela
Slättlandet, då fick han se en rök stiga upp från landet, lik
röken från en smältugn.

Så skedde då, att när Gud fördärvade städerna på Slätten, tänkte
han på Abraham och lät Lot komma undan omstörtningen, då han
omstörtade städerna där Lot hade bott.

Och Lot drog upp från Soar till bergsbygden och bodde där med
sina båda döttrar, ty han fruktade för att bo kvar i Soar; och
han bodde med sina båda döttrar i en grotta.
Då sade den äldre till den yngre: ╜Vår fader är gammal, och
ingen man finnes i landet, som kan gå in till oss efter all
världens sedvänja.
Kom, låt oss giva vår fader vin att dricka och lägga oss hos
honom, för att vi må skaffa oss livsfrukt genom vår fader.╜
Så gåvo de sin fader vin att dricka den natten, och den äldre
gick in och lade sig hos sin fader, och han märkte icke när hon
lade sig, ej heller när hon stod upp.
Dagen därefter sade den äldre till den yngre: ╜Se, jag låg i
natt hos min fader; låt oss också denna natt giva honom vin att
dricka, och gå du in och lägg dig hos honom, för att vi må skaffa
oss livsfrukt genom vår fader.╜
Så gåvo de också den natten sin fader vin att dricka; och den
yngre gick och lade sig hos honom, och han märkte icke när hon
lade sig, ej heller när hon stod upp.
Så blevo Lots båda döttrar havande genom sin fader.
Och den äldre födde en son, och hon gav honom namnet Moab; från
honom härstamma moabiterna ända till denna dag.
Den yngre födde ock en son, och hon gav honom namnet Ben-Ammi;
från honom härstamma Ammons barn ända till denna dag.

Och Abraham bröt upp därifrån och drog till Sydlandet; där
uppehöll han sig mellan Kades och Sur, och någon tid bodde han i
Gerar.
Och Abraham sade om sin hustru Sara att hon var hans syster.  Då
sände Abimelek, konungen i Gerar, och lät hämta Sara till sig.
Men Gud kom till Abimelek i en dröm om natten och sade till
honom: ╜Se, du måste dö för den kvinnas skull som du har tagit
till dig, fast hon är en annan mans äkta hustru.╜
Men Abimelek hade icke kommit vid henne.  Och han svarade:
╜Herre, vill du då dräpa också rättfärdiga människor?
Sade han icke själv till mig: 'Hon är min syster'?  Och likaså
sade hon: 'Han är min broder.'  I mitt hjärtas oskuld och med
rena händer har jag gjort detta.╜
Då sade Gud till honom i drömmen: ╜Ja, jag vet att du har gjort
detta i ditt hjärtas oskuld, och jag har själv hindrat dig från
att synda mot mig; därför har jag icke tillstatt dig att komma
vid henne.
Men giv nu mannen hans hustru tillbaka; ty han är en profet.
Och han må bedja för dig, så att du får leva.  Men om du icke
giver henne tillbaka, så vet att du skall döden dö, du själv och
alla som tillhöra dig.

Då stod Abimelek upp bittida om morgonen och kallade till sig
alla sina tjänare och berättade allt detta för dem; och männen
blevo mycket förskräckta.
Sedan kallade Abimelek Abraham till sig och sade till honom:
╜Vad har du gjort mot oss!  Vari har jag försyndat mig mot dig,
eftersom du har velat komma mig och mitt rike att begå en så
stor synd?  På otillbörligt sätt har du handlat mot mig.╜
Och Abimelek sade ytterligare till Abraham: ╜Vad var din mening,
när du gjorde detta?╜
Abraham svarade: ╜Jag tänkte: 'På denna ort fruktar man nog icke
Gud; de skola dräpa mig för min hustrus skull.'
Hon är också verkligen min syster, min faders dotter, fastän
icke min moders dotter; och så blev hon min hustru.
Men när Gud sände mig ut på vandring bort ifrån min faders hus,
sade jag till henne: 'Bevisa mig din kärlek därmed att du säger
om mig, varthelst vi komma, att jag är din broder.'╜
Då tog Abimelek får och fäkreatur, tjänare och tjänarinnor och
gav dem åt Abraham.  Han gav honom ock hans hustru Sara
tillbaka.
Och Abimelek sade: ╜Se, mitt land ligger öppet för dig; du må bo
var du finner för gott.╜
Och till Sara sade han: ╜Se, jag giver åt din broder tusen
siklar silver; det skall för dig vara en försoningsgåva inför
allt ditt folk.  Så har du inför alla fått upprättelse.╜
Och Abraham bad till Gud, och Gud botade Abimelek och hans hustru
och hans tjänstekvinnor, så att de åter kunde föda barn.
HERREN hade nämligen gjort alla kvinnor i Abimeleks hus
ofruktsamma, för Saras, Abrahams hustrus, skull.
Och HERREN såg till Sara, såsom han hade lovat, och HERREN
gjorde med Sara såsom han hade sagt.
Sara blev havande och födde åt Abraham en son på hans ålderdom,
vid den bestämda tid som Gud hade sagt honom.
Och Abraham gav den son som var född åt honom, den som Sara hade
fött åt honom, namnet Isak.
Och Abraham omskar sin son Isak, när denne var åtta dagar
gammal, såsom Gud hade bjudit honom.
Och Abraham var hundra år gammal, när hans son Isak föddes åt
honom.
Och Sara sade: ╜Gud har berett mig ett löje; var och en som får
höra detta skall le mot mig.╜
Och hon sade: ╜Vem skulle hava sagt Abraham att Sara skulle giva
barn di?  Och nu har jag fött honom en son på hans ålderdom!╜

Och barnet växte upp och blev avvant; och den dag då Isak
avvandes gjorde Abraham ett stort gästabud.
Då fick Sara se Hagars, den egyptiska kvinnans, son, som denna
hade fött åt Abraham, leka och skämta;
och hon sade till Abraham: ╜Driv ut denna tjänstekvinna och
hennes son, ty denna tjänstekvinnas son skall icke ärva med min
son Isak.╜
Det talet misshagade Abraham mycket för hans sons skull.
Men Gud sade till Abraham: ╜Du må icke för gossens och för din
tjänstekvinnas skull låta detta misshaga dig.  Lyssna till Sara
i allt vad hon säger dig; ty genom Isak är det som säd skall
uppkallas efter dig.
Men också tjänstekvinnans son skall jag göra till ett folk,
därför att han är din säd.╜

Bittida följande morgon tog Abraham bröd och en lägel med vatten
och gav det åt Hagar; han lade det på hennes rygg och gav henne
barnet med och lät henne gå.  Och hon begav sig åstad och irrade
omkring i Beer-Sebas öken.
Men när vattnet i lägeln hade tagit slut, kastade hon barnet
ifrån sig under en buske
och gick bort och satte sig ett stycke därifrån, på ett
bågskotts avstånd, ty hon tänkte: ╜Jag förmår icke se på, huru
barnet dör.╜  Och där hon nu satt, på något avstånd, brast hon ut
i gråt.
Då hörde Gud gossens röst, och Guds ängel ropade till Hagar från
himmelen och sade till henne: ╜Vad fattas dig, Hagar?  Frukta
icke; ty Gud har hört gossens röst, där han ligger.
Gå och lyft upp gossen, och tag honom vid handen; jag skall göra
honom till ett stort folk.╜
Och Gud öppnade hennes ögon, så att hon blev varse en
vattenbrunn.  Och hon gick dit och fyllde sin lägel med vatten
och gav gossen att dricka.
Och Gud var med gossen, och han växte upp och bodde i öknen och
blev med tiden en bågskytt.
Han bodde i öknen Paran; och hans moder tog en hustru åt honom
från Egyptens land.

Vid den tiden kom Abimelek med Pikol, sin härhövitsman, och
talade med Abraham och sade: ╜Gud är med dig i allt vad du gör.
Så lova mig nu här med ed vid Gud att du icke skall göra dig
skyldig till något svek mot mig eller mina barn och
efterkommande, utan att du skall bevisa mig och det land där du
nu bor såsom främling samma godhet som jag har bevisat dig.╜
Abraham sade: ╜Det vill jag lova dig.╜
Dock gjorde Abraham Abimelek förebråelser angående en
vattenbrunn som Abimeleks tjänare hade tagit ifrån honom.
Men Abimelek svarade: ╜Jag vet icke vem som har gjort detta;
själv har du ingenting sagt mig, och jag har icke hört något
därom förrän i dag.╜
Då tog Abraham får och fäkreatur och gav åt Abimelek; och de
slöto förbund med varandra.
Men Abraham ställde sju lamm av hjorden avsides.
Då sade Abimelek till Abraham: ╜Vad betyda de sju lammen som du
har ställt där avsides?╜
Han svarade: ╜Dessa sju lamm skall du taga emot av mig, för att
detta må vara mig till ett vittnesbörd därom att det är jag som
har grävt denna brunn.╜
Därav kallades det stället <spärr>Beer-Seba</spärr>, eftersom
de båda där gingo eden.
När de så hade slutit förbund vid Beer-Seba, stodo Abimelek och
hans härhövitsman Pikol upp och vände tillbaka till filistéernas
land.

Och Abraham planterade en tamarisk vid Beer-Seba och åkallade
där HERRENS, den evige Gudens, namn.
Och Abraham bodde i filistéernas land en lång tid.

En tid härefter hände sig att Gud satte Abraham på prov.  Han
sade till honom: ╜Abraham!╜  Han svarade: ╜Här är jag.╜
Då sade han: ╜Tag din son Isak, din ende son, som du har kär,
och gå bort till Moria land, och offra honom där såsom
brännoffer, på ett berg som jag skall säga dig.╜

Bittida följande morgon lastade Abraham sin åsna och tog med sig
två sina tjänare och sin son Isak; och sedan han hade huggit
sönder ved till brännoffer, bröt han upp och begav sig på väg
till den plats som Gud hade sagt honom.
När nu Abraham på tredje dagen lyfte upp sina ögon och fick se
platsen på avstånd,
sade han till sina tjänare: ╜Stannen I här med åsnan; jag och
gossen vilja gå ditbort.  När vi hava tillbett, skola vi komma
tillbaka till eder.╜
Och Abraham tog veden till brännoffret och lade den på sin son
Isak, men själv tog han elden och kniven, och de gingo så båda
tillsammans.
Då talade Isak till sin fader Abraham och sade: ╜Min fader!╜
Han svarade: ╜Vad vill du, min son?╜  Han sade: ╜Se, här är
elden och veden, men var är fåret till brännoffret?╜
Abraham svarade: ╜Gud utser nog åt sig fåret till brännoffret,
min son.╜  Så gingo de båda tillsammans.

När de nu hade kommit till den plats som Gud hade sagt Abraham,
byggde han där ett altare och lade veden därpå, sedan band han
sin son Isak och lade honom på altaret ovanpå veden.
Och Abraham räckte ut sin hand och tog kniven för att slakta sin
son.
Då ropade HERRENS ängel till honom från himmelen och sade:
╜Abraham!  Abraham!╜  Han svarade: ╜Här är jag.╜
Då sade han: ╜Låt icke din hand komma vid gossen, och gör honom
intet; ty nu vet jag att du fruktar Gud, nu då du icke har
undanhållit mig din ende son.╜
När då Abraham lyfte upp sina ögon, fick han bakom sig se en
vädur, som hade fastnat med sina horn i ett snår; och Abraham
gick dit och tog väduren och offrade den till brännoffer i sin
sons ställe.
Och Abraham gav den platsen namnet <spärr>HERREN utser</spärr>;
nu för tiden heter den <spärr>Berget där HERREN låter se
sig</spärr>.

Och HERRENS ängel ropade för andra gången till Abraham från
himmelen
och sade: ╜Jag svär vid mig själv, säger HERREN: Eftersom du
har gjort detta och icke undanhållit mig din ende son
därför skall jag rikligen välsigna dig och göra din säd talrik
såsom stjärnorna på himmelen och såsom sanden på havets strand;
och din säd skall intaga sina fienders portar.
Och i din säd skola alla folk på jorden välsigna sig, därför
att du lyssnade till mina ord.╜
Sedan vände Abraham tillbaka till sina tjänare; och de stodo upp
och gingo tillsammans till Beer-Seba.  Och Abraham bodde i
Beer-Seba.

En tid härefter blev så berättat för Abraham: ╜Se, Milka har ock
fött barn åt din broder Nahor.╜
Barnen voro Us, hans förstfödde, och Bus, dennes broder, och
Kemuel, Arams fader,
vidare Kesed, Haso, Pildas, Jidlaf och Betuel.
Men Betuel födde Rebecka.  Dessa åtta föddes av Milka åt Nahor,
Abrahams broder.
Och hans bihustru, som hette Reuma, födde ock barn, nämligen
Teba, Gaham, Tahas och Maaka.

Och Sara blev ett hundra tjugusju år gammal; så gammal blev
Sara.
Och Sara dog i Kirjat-Arba, det är Hebron, i Kanaans land.  Och
Abraham kom och höll dödsklagan efter Sara och begrät henne.

Därefter stod Abraham upp och gick bort ifrån den döda och
talade så till Hets barn:
╜Jag är en främling och gäst hos eder.  Låten mig nu få en egen
grav hos eder, så att jag kan föra min döda dit och begrava
henne.╜
Då svarade Hets barn Abraham och sade till honom:
╜Hör oss, herre.  Du är en Guds hövding bland oss; begrav din
döda i den förnämligaste av våra gravar.  Ingen av oss skall
vägra att giva dig sin grav till att där begrava din döda.╜
Men Abraham stod upp och bugade sig för landets folk, Hets barn;
och han talade med dem och sade: ╜Om I tillstädjen att jag för
ut min döda och begraver henne, så hören mig och läggen eder ut
för mig hos Efron, Sohars son,
så att han giver mig den grotta i Makpela, som tillhör honom,
och som ligger vid ändan av hans åker.  Mot full betalning i
eder krets må han giva mig den till egen grav.╜
Men Efron satt där bland Hets barn.  Och Efron, hetiten, svarade
Abraham i närvaro av Hets barn, alla som bodde inom hans
stadsport; han sade:
╜Icke så, min herre.  Hör mig: Jag skänker dig åkern; grottan
som finnes där skänker jag dig ock; jag skänker dig den inför
mina landsmäns ögon; begrav där din döda.╜
Men Abraham bugade sig för landets folk;
och han talade till Efron i närvaro av landets folk och sade:
╜Värdes dock höra mig.  Jag vill betala åkerns värde; tag emot
det av mig, och låt mig där begrava min döda.╜
Då svarade Efron Abraham och sade till honom:
╜Min herre, hör mig.  Ett jordstycke till ett värde av fyra
hundra siklar silver, vad betyder det mellan mig och dig?
Begrav du din döda.╜

Och Abraham förstod Efron och vägde upp åt honom den summa som
Efron hade uppgivit i närvaro av Hets barn, fyra hundra siklar
silver, sådant silver som var gångbart i handel.
Så skedde det att Efrons åker i Makpela, gent emot Mamre, själva
åkern med grottan som fanns där och alla träd på åkern, så
långt dess område sträckte sig runt omkring, blev överlåten åt
Abraham till egendom
inför Hets barns ögon, inför alla som bodde inom hans stadsport.

Därefter begrov Abraham sin hustru Sara i grottan på åkern i
Makpela, gent emot Mamre, det är Hebron, i Kanaans land.
Åkern med grottan som fanns där blev så av Hets barn överlåten
åt Abraham till egen grav.
Abraham var nu gammal och kommen till hög ålder, och HERREN hade
välsignat Abraham i alla stycken.
Då sade han till sin äldste hustjänare, den som förestod all
hans egendom: ╜Lägg din hand under min länd;
jag vill av dig taga en ed vid HERREN, himmelens Gud och jordens
Gud, att du icke till hustru åt min son skall taga en dotter
till någon av kananéerna bland vilka jag bor,
utan att du skall gå till mitt eget land och till min släkt och
där taga hustru åt min son Isak.╜
Tjänaren sade till honom: ╜Men om så händer, att kvinnan icke
vill följa mig hit till landet, måste jag då föra din son
tillbaka till det land som du har kommit ifrån?╜
Abraham svarade honom: ╜Tag dig till vara för att föra min son
dit tillbaka.
HERREN, himmelens Gud, som har fört mig bort ifrån min faders
hus och ifrån mitt fädernesland, han som har talat till mig och
svurit och sagt: 'Åt din säd skall jag giva detta land', han
skall sända sin ängel framför dig, så att du därifrån skall
kunna få en hustru åt min son.
Men om kvinnan icke vill följa dig, så är du fri ifrån denna din
ed till mig.  Allenast må du icke föra min son dit tillbaka.╜
Då lade tjänaren sin hand under sin herre Abrahams länd och
lovade honom detta med ed.

Och tjänaren tog tio av sin herres kameler och drog åstad med
allahanda dyrbara gåvor från sin herre; han stod upp och drog
åstad till Nahors stad i Aram-Naharaim.
Där lät han kamelerna lägra sig utanför staden, vid en
vattenbrunn; och det led mot aftonen, den tid då kvinnorna
plägade komma ut för att hämta vatten.
Och han sade: ╜HERRE, min herre Abrahams Gud, låt mig i dag få
ett lyckosamt möte, och gör nåd med min herre Abraham.
Se, jag står här vid vattenkällan, och stadsbornas döttrar komma
hitut för att hämta vatten.
Om jag nu säger till en flicka: 'Håll hit din kruka, och låt mig
få dricka' och hon då svarar: 'Drick; dina kameler vill jag ock
vattna', må hon då vara den som du har utsett åt din tjänare
Isak, så skall jag därav veta att du har gjort nåd med min
herre.╜

Och se, innan han hade slutat att tala, kom Rebecka ditut, en
dotter till Betuel, som var son till Milka, Abrahams broder
Nahors hustru; och hon bar sin kruka på axeln.
Och flickan var mycket fager att skåda, en jungfru som ingen man
hade känt.  Hon gick nu ned till källan och fyllde sin kruka och
steg så upp igen.
Då skyndade tjänaren emot henne och sade: ╜Låt mig få dricka
litet vatten ur din kruka.╜
Hon svarade: ╜Drick, min herre╜ och lyfte strax ned krukan på
sin hand och gav honom att dricka.
Och sedan hon hade givit honom att dricka, sade hon: ╜Jag vill
ock ösa upp vatten åt dina kameler, till dess att de alla hava
fått dricka.╜
Och hon tömde strax sin kruka i vattenhon och skyndade åter till
brunnen för att hämta vatten och öste så upp åt alla hans
kameler.
Men mannen såg på henne under tystnad och undrade om HERREN hade
gjort hans resa lyckosam eller icke.
Och när alla kamelerna hade druckit, tog mannen fram en näsring
av guld, en halv sikel i vikt, och två armband av guld, tio
siklar i vikt,
och frågade: ╜Vems dotter är du?  Säg mig det.  Och säg mig om
vi kunna få natthärbärge i din faders hus?╜
Hon svarade honom: ╜Jag är dotter till Betuel, Milkas son, som
av henne föddes åt Nahor.╜
Och hon sade ytterligare till honom: ╜Vi hava rikligt med både
halm och foder; natthärbärge kan du ock få.╜
Då böjde mannen sig ned och tillbad HERREN
och sade: ╜Lovad vare HERREN, min herre Abrahams Gud, som icke
har tagit sin nåd och trofasthet ifrån min herre!  Mig har
HERREN ledsagat på vägen, hem till min herres fränder.╜
Och flickan skyndade åstad och berättade allt detta i sin moders
hus.

Men Rebecka hade en broder som hette Laban.  Och Laban skyndade
åstad till mannen därute vid källan.
När han nämligen såg näsringen och armbanden som hans syster
bar, och när han hörde huru hans syster Rebecka berättade: 'Så
och så talade mannen till mig', då begav han sig ut till mannen,
där denne stod hos kamelerna vid källan.
Och han sade: ╜Kom in, du HERRENS välsignade; varför står du
härute?  Jag har berett plats i huset, och rum finnes för
kamelerna.╜
Så kom då mannen in i huset; och man lastade av kamelerna, och
tog fram halm och foder åt kamelerna, och vatten till att två
hans och hans följeslagares fötter.
Och man satte fram mat för honom; men han sade: ╜Jag vill icke
äta, förrän jag har framfört mitt ärende.╜  Laban svarade: ╜Så
tala då.╜

Då sade han: ╜Jag är Abrahams tjänare.
Och HERREN har rikligen välsignat min herre, så att han har
blivit en mäktig man; han har givit honom får och fäkreatur,
silver och guld, tjänare och tjänarinnor, kameler och åsnor.
Och Sara, min herres hustru, har fött åt min herre en son på sin
ålderdom, och åt denne har han givit allt vad han äger.
Och min herre har tagit en ed av mig och sagt: 'Till hustru åt
min son skall du icke taga en dotter till någon av kananéerna i
vilkas land jag bor,
utan du skall gå till min faders hus och till min släkt och där
taga hustru åt min son.'
Då sade jag till min herre: 'Men om nu kvinnan icke vill följa
med mig?'
Han svarade mig: 'HERREN, inför vilken jag har vandrat, skall
sända sin ängel med dig och göra din resa lyckosam, så att du åt
min son får en hustru av min släkt och av min faders hus;
i sådant fall skall du vara löst från din ed till mig, när du
har kommit till min släkt.  Också om de icke giva henne åt dig,
skall du vara fri ifrån eden till mig.'
Så kom jag i dag till källan, och jag sade: HERRE, min herre
Abrahams Gud, om du vill låta den resa på vilken jag är stadd
bliva lyckosam,
må det då ske, när jag nu står här vid vattenkällan, att om en
ung kvinna kommer ut för att hämta vatten och jag säger till
henne: 'Låt mig få dricka litet vatten ur din kruka'
och hon då svarar mig: 'Drick du; åt dina kameler vill jag ock
ösa upp vatten' -- må hon då vara den kvinna som HERREN har
utsett åt min herres son.
Och innan jag hade slutat att så tala för mig själv, se, då kom
Rebecka ut med sin kruka på axeln och gick ned till källan för
att hämta vatten.  Då sade jag till henne: 'Låt mig få dricka.'
Och strax lyfte hon ned sin kruka från axeln och sade: 'Drick;
dina kameler vill jag ock vattna.'  Så drack jag, och hon
vattnade också kamelerna.
Och jag frågade henne och sade: 'Vems dotter är du?'  Hon
svarade: 'Jag är dotter till Betuel, Nahors son, som föddes åt
honom av Milka.'  Då satte jag ringen i hennes näsa och
armbanden på hennes armar.
Och jag böjde mig ned och tillbad HERREN och lovade HERREN, min
herre Abrahams Gud, som hade ledsagat mig på den rätta vägen, så
att jag åt hans son skulle få min herres frändes dotter.
Om I nu viljen visa min herre kärlek och trofasthet, så sägen
mig det; varom icke, så sägen mig ock det, för att jag då må
vända mig åt annat håll, till höger eller till vänster.╜

Då svarade Laban och Betuel och sade: ╜Från HERREN har detta
utgått; vi kunna i den saken intet säga till dig, varken ont
eller gott.
Se, där står Rebecka inför dig, tag henne och drag åstad; må hon
bliva hustru åt din herres son, såsom HERREN har sagt.╜
När Abrahams tjänare hörde deras ord, föll han ned på jorden och
tillbad HERREN.
Sedan tog tjänaren fram smycken av silver och guld, så ock
kläder, och gav detta åt Rebecka.  Jämväl åt hennes broder och
hennes moder gav han dyrbara skänker.
Och de åto och drucko, han och hans följeslagare, och stannade
sedan där över natten.  Men om morgonen, när de hade stått upp,
sade han: ╜Låten mig nu fara till min herre.╜
Då sade hennes broder och hennes moder: ╜Låt flickan stanna hos
oss några dagar, tio eller så; sedan må du fara.╜
Men han svarade dem: ╜Uppehållen mig icke, eftersom HERREN har
gjort min resa lyckosam.  Låten mig fara; jag vill resa hem till
min herre.╜
Då sade de: ╜Vi vilja kalla hit flickan och fråga henne själv.╜
Och de kallade Rebecka till sig och sade till henne: ╜Vill du
resa med denne man?╜  Hon svarade: ╜Ja.╜
Då bestämde de att deras syster Rebecka jämte sin amma skulle
fara med Abrahams tjänare och dennes män.
Och de välsignade Rebecka och sade till henne: ╜Av dig, du vår
syster, komme tusen gånger tio tusen, och må dina avkomlingar
intaga sina fienders portar.╜
Och Rebecka och hennes tärnor stodo upp och satte sig på
kamelerna och följde med mannen; så tog tjänaren Rebecka med sig
och for sin väg.

Men Isak var på väg hem från Beer-Lahai-Roi, ty han bodde i
Sydlandet.
Och mot aftonen hade Isak gått ut på fältet i sorgsna tankar.
När han då lyfte upp sina ögon, fick han se kameler komma.
Då nu också Rebecka lyfte upp sina ögon och fick se Isak, steg
hon med hast ned från kamelen;
och hon frågade tjänaren: ╜Vem är den mannen som kommer emot oss
där på fältet?╜  Tjänaren svarade: ╜Det är min herre.╜  Då tog
hon sin slöja och höljde sig i den.
Och tjänaren förtäljde för Isak huru han hade uträttat allt.
Och Isak förde henne in i sin moder Saras tält; och han tog
Rebecka till sig, och hon blev hans hustru, och han hade henne
kär.  Så blev Isak tröstad i sorgen efter sin moder.
Och Abraham tog sig ännu en hustru, och hon hette Ketura.
Hon födde åt honom Simran, Joksan, Medan, Midjan, Jisbak och
Sua.
Och Joksan födde Saba och Dedan, och Dedans söner voro
assuréerna, letuséerna och leumméerna.
Och Midjans söner voro Efa, Efer, Hanok, Abida och Eldaa.  Alla
dessa voro Keturas söner.
Och Abraham gav allt vad han ägde åt Isak.
Men åt sönerna till sina bihustrur gav Abraham skänker och
skilde dem, medan han själv ännu levde, från sin son Isak och
lät dem draga österut, bort till Österlandet.

Och detta är antalet av Abrahams levnadsår: ett hundra
sjuttiofem år;
därefter gav Abraham upp andan och dog i en god ålder, gammal
och mätt på livet, och blev samlad till sina fäder.
Och hans söner Isak och Ismael begrovo honom i grottan i
Makpela, på hetiten Efrons, Sohars sons, åker gent emot Mamre,
den åker som Abraham hade köpt av Hets barn; där blev Abraham
begraven, såväl som hans hustru Sara.
Och efter Abrahams död välsignade Gud hans son Isak.  Och Isak
bodde vid Beer-Lahai-Roi.

Och detta är berättelsen om Ismaels släkt, Abrahams sons, som
föddes åt Abraham av Hagar, Saras egyptiska tjänstekvinna.
Dessa äro namnen på Ismaels söner, med deras namn, efter deras
ättföljd: Nebajot, Ismaels förstfödde, vidare Kedar, Adbeel,
Mibsam,
Misma, Duma och Massa,
Hadad och Tema, Jetur, Nafis och Kedma.
Dessa voro Ismaels söner och dessa deras namn, i deras byar och
tältläger, tolv hövdingar efter deras stammar.
Och detta är antalet av Ismaels levnadsår: ett hundra trettiosju
år; därefter gav han upp andan och dog och blev samlad till sina
fäder.
Och de hade sina boningsplatser från Havila ända till Sur, som
ligger gent emot Egypten, fram emot Assyrien.  Han kom i strid
med alla sina bröder.

Och detta är berättelsen om Isaks, Abrahams sons, släkt.
Abraham födde Isak;
och Isak var fyrtio år gammal, när han till hustru åt sig tog
Rebecka, som var dotter till araméen Betuel från Paddan-Aram och
syster till araméen Laban.
Och Isak bad till HERREN för sin hustru Rebecka, ty hon var
ofruktsam; och HERREN bönhörde honom, så att hans hustru Rebecka
blev havande.
Men barnen stötte varandra i hennes liv; då sade hon: ╜Om det
skulle gå så, varför skulle jag då vara till?╜  Och hon gick
bort för att fråga HERREN.
Och HERREN svarade henne:
  ╜Två folk finnas i ditt liv,
  två folkstammar skola ur ditt sköte söndras från varandra;
  den ena stammen skall vara den andra övermäktig,
  och den äldre skall tjäna den yngre.╜

När sedan tiden var inne att hon skulle föda, se, då funnos
tvillingar i hennes liv.
Den som först kom fram var rödlätt och över hela kroppen såsom
en hårmantel; och de gåvo honom namnet Esau.
Därefter kom hans broder fram, och denne höll med sin hand i
Esaus häl; och han fick namnet Jakob.  Men Isak var sextio
år gammal, när de föddes.

Och barnen växte upp, och Esau blev en skicklig jägare, som höll
sig ute på marken; Jakob åter blev en fromsint man, som bodde i
tält.
Och Isak hade Esau kärast, ty han hade smak för villebråd; men
Rebecka hade Jakob kärast.

En gång, då Jakob höll på att koka något till soppa, kom Esau
hem från marken, uppgiven av hunger.
Och Esau sade till Jakob: ╜Låt mig få till livs av det röda, det
röda du har där; ty jag är uppgiven av hunger.╜  Därav fick han
namnet <spärr>Edom</spärr>.
Men Jakob sade: ╜Sälj då nu åt mig din förstfödslorätt.╜
Esau svarade: ╜Jag är ju döden nära; vartill gagnar mig då min
förstfödslorätt?╜
Jakob sade: ╜Så giv mig nu din ed därpå.╜  Och han gav honom sin
ed och sålde så sin förstfödslorätt till Jakob.
Men Jakob gav Esau bröd och linssoppa; och han åt och drack och
stod sedan upp och gick sin väg.  Så ringa aktade Esau sin
förstfödslorätt.

Men en hungersnöd uppstod i landet, en ny hungersnöd, efter den
som hade varit förut, i Abrahams tid.  Då begav sig Isak till
Abimelek, filistéernas konung, i Gerar.
Och HERREN uppenbarade sig för honom och sade: ╜Drag icke ned
till Egypten; bo kvar i det land som jag skall säga dig.
Stanna såsom främling här i landet; jag skall vara med dig och
välsigna dig, ty åt dig och din säd skall jag giva alla dessa
länder, och skall hålla den ed som jag har svurit din fader
Abraham.

Jag skall göra din säd talrik såsom stjärnorna på himmelen, och
jag skall giva åt din säd alla dessa länder; och i din säd skola
alla folk på jorden välsigna sig,
därför att Abraham har lyssnat till mina ord och hållit vad jag
har bjudit honom hålla, mina bud, mina stadgar och mina lagar.╜
Så stannade Isak kvar i Gerar.

Och när männen på orten frågade honom om hans hustru, sade han:
╜Hon är min syster.╜  Han fruktade nämligen för att säga att hon
var hans hustru, ty han tänkte: ╜Männen här på orten kunde då
dräpa mig för Rebeckas skull, eftersom hon är så fager att
skåda.╜
Men när han hade varit där en längre tid, hände sig en gång, då
Abimelek, filistéernas konung, blickade ut genom fönstret, att
han fick se Isak kärligt skämta med sin hustru Rebecka.
Då kallade Abimelek Isak till sig och sade: ╜Hon är ju din
hustru; huru har du då kunnat säga: 'Hon är min syster'?╜  Isak
svarade honom: ╜Jag fruktade att jag annars skulle bliva dödad
för hennes skull.╜
Då sade Abimelek: ╜Vad har du gjort mot oss!  Huru lätt kunde
det icke hava skett att någon av folket hade lägrat din hustru?
Och så hade du dragit skuld över oss.╜
Sedan bjöd Abimelek allt folket och sade: ╜Den som kommer vid
denne man eller vid hans hustru, han skall straffas med döden.╜

Och Isak sådde där i landet och fick det året hundrafalt, ty
HERREN välsignade honom.
Och han blev en mäktig man; hans makt blev större och större, så
att han till slut var mycket mäktig.
Han ägde så många får och fäkreatur och så många tjänare, att
filistéerna begynte avundas honom.
Och alla de brunnar som hans faders tjänare hade grävt i hans
fader Abrahams tid, dem hade filistéerna kastat igen och fyllt
med grus.
Och Abimelek sade till Isak: ╜Drag bort ifrån oss; ty du har
blivit oss alltför mäktig.╜
Då drog Isak bort därifrån och slog upp sitt läger i Gerars dal
och bodde där.
Och Isak lät åter gräva ut de vattenbrunnar som hade blivit
grävda i hans fader Abrahams tid, men som filistéerna efter
Abrahams död hade kastat igen; och han gav dem åter de namn som
hans fader hade givit dem.
Och Isaks tjänare grävde i dalen och funno där en brunn med
rinnande vatten.
Men herdarna i Gerar begynte tvista med Isaks herdar och sade:
╜Vattnet är vårt.╜  Då gav han den brunnen namnet
<spärr>Esek</spärr>, eftersom de hade kivat med honom.
Därefter grävde de en annan brunn, men om den kommo de ock i
tvist; då gav han den namnet <spärr>Sitna</spärr>.
Sedan begav han sig därifrån till en annan plats och grävde åter
en brunn; om den tvistade de icke.  Därför gav han denna namnet
<spärr>Rehobot</spärr>, i det han sade: ╜Nu har ju HERREN
givit oss utrymme, så att vi kunna föröka oss i landet.╜

Sedan drog han därifrån upp till Beer-Seba.
Och HERREN uppenbarade sig för honom den natten och sade: ╜Jag
är Abrahams, din faders, Gud.  Frukta icke, ty jag är med dig,
och jag skall välsigna dig och göra din säd talrik, för min
tjänare Abrahams skull.╜
Då byggde han där ett altare och åkallade HERRENS namn och slog
där upp sitt tält.  Och Isaks tjänare grävde där en brunn.

Och Abimelek begav sig till honom från Gerar med Ahussat, sin
vän, och Pikol, sin härhövitsman.
Men Isak sade till dem: ╜Varför kommen I till mig, I som haten
mig och haven drivit mig ifrån eder?╜
De svarade: ╜Vi hava tydligt sett att HERREN är med dig; därför
tänkte vi: 'Låt oss giva varandra en ed, vi och du, så att vi
sluta ett förbund med dig,
att du icke skall göra oss något ont, likasom vi å vår sida
icke hava kommit vid dig, och likasom vi icke hava gjort dig
annat än gott och hava låtit dig fara i frid.'  Du är nu HERRENS
välsignade.╜
Då gjorde han ett gästabud för dem, och de åto och drucko.
Bittida följande morgon svuro de varandra eden; sedan lät Isak
dem gå, och de foro ifrån honom i frid.
Samma dag kommo Isaks tjänare och berättade för honom om den
brunn som de hade grävt och sade till honom: ╜Vi hava funnit
vatten.╜
Och han kallade den Sibea.  Därav heter staden Beer-Seba ännu i
dag.

När Esau var fyrtio år gammal, tog han till hustrur Judit,
dotter till hetiten Beeri, och Basemat, dotter till hetiten
Elon.
Men dessa blevo en hjärtesorg för Isak och Rebecka.

När Isak hade blivit gammal och hans ögon voro skumma, så att
han icke kunde se, kallade han till sig Esau, sin äldste son,
och sade till honom: ╜Min son!╜  Han svarade honom: ╜Vad vill
du?╜
Då sade han: ╜Se, jag är gammal och vet icke när jag skall dö.
Så tag nu dina jaktredskap, ditt koger och din båge, och gå ut i
marken och jaga villebråd åt mig;
red sedan till åt mig en smaklig rätt, en sådan som jag tycker
om, och bär in den till mig till att äta, på det att min själ må
välsigna dig, förrän jag dör.╜

Men Rebecka hörde huru Isak talade till sin son Esau.  Och medan
Esau gick ut i marken för att jaga villebråd till att föra hem,
sade Rebecka till sin son Jakob: ╜Se, jag har hört din fader
tala så till din broder Esau:
'Hämta mig villebråd och red till åt mig en smaklig rätt, på det
att jag må äta och sedan välsigna dig inför HERREN, förrän jag
dör.'
Så hör nu vad jag säger, min son, och gör vad jag bjuder dig.
Gå bort till hjorden och hämta mig därifrån två goda killingar,
så vill jag av dem tillreda en smaklig rätt åt din fader, en
sådan som han tycker om.
Och du skall bära in den till din fader till att äta, på det att
han må välsigna dig, förrän han dör.╜
Men Jakob sade till sin moder Rebecka: ╜Min broder Esau är ju
luden, och jag är slät.
Kanhända tager min fader på mig, och jag bliver då av honom
hållen för en bespottare och skaffar mig förbannelse i stället
för välsignelse.╜
Då sade hans moder till honom: ╜Den förbannelsen komme över mig,
min son; hör nu allenast vad jag säger, och gå och hämta dem åt
mig.╜

Då gick han och hämtade dem och bar dem till sin moder; och hans
moder tillredde en smaklig rätt, en sådan som hans fader tyckte
om.
Och Rebecka tog Esaus, sin äldre sons, högtidskläder, som hon
hade hos sig i huset, och satte dem på Jakob, sin yngre son.
Och med skinnen av killingarna beklädde hon hans händer och den
släta delen av hans hals.
Sedan lämnade hon åt sin son Jakob den smakliga rätten och
brödet som hon hade tillrett.
Och han gick in till sin fader och sade: ╜Min fader!╜  Han
svarade: ╜Vad vill du?  Vem är du, min son?╜
Då sade Jakob till sin fader: ╜Jag är Esau, din förstfödde.  Jag
har gjort såsom du tillsade mig; sätt dig upp och ät av mitt
villebråd, på det att din själ må välsigna mig.╜
Men Isak sade till sin son: ╜Huru har du så snart kunnat finna
något, min son?╜  Han svarade: ╜HERREN, din Gud, skickade det i
min väg.╜
Då sade Isak till Jakob: ╜Kom hit, min son, och låt mig taga på
dig och känna om du är min son Esau eller icke.╜
Och Jakob gick fram till sin fader Isak; och när denne hade
tagit på honom, sade han: ╜Rösten är Jakobs röst, men händerna
äro Esaus händer.╜
Och han kände icke igen honom, ty hans händer voro ludna såsom
hans broder Esaus händer; och han välsignade honom.
Men han frågade: ╜Är du verkligen min son Esau?╜  Han svarade:
╜Ja.╜
Då sade han: ╜Bär hit maten åt mig och låt mig äta av min sons
villebråd, på det att min själ må välsigna dig.╜  Och han bar
fram den till honom, och han åt; och han räckte honom vin, och
han drack.
Därefter sade hans fader Isak till honom: ╜Kom hit och kyss mig,
min son.╜
När han då gick fram och kysste honom, kände han lukten av hans
kläder och välsignade honom; han sade:
  ╜Se, av min son utgår doft,
  lik doften av en mark,
      som HERREN har välsignat.
Så give dig Gud
      av himmelens dagg
  och av jordens fetma
  och säd och vin i rikligt mått.
Folk tjäne dig,
  och folkslag falle ned för dig.
  Bliv en herre över dina bröder,
  och må din moders söner falla ned för dig.
  Förbannad vare den som förbannar dig,
  och välsignad vare den som välsignar dig!╜

Men när Isak hade givit Jakob sin välsignelse och Jakob just
hade gått ut från sin fader Isak, kom hans broder Esau hem från
jakten.
Därefter tillredde också han en smaklig rätt och bar in den till
sin fader och sade till sin fader: ╜Må min fader stå upp och äta
av sin sons villebråd, på det att din själ må välsigna mig.╜
Hans fader Isak frågade honom: ╜Vem är du?╜  Han svarade: ╜Jag
är Esau, din förstfödde son.╜
Då blev Isak övermåttan häpen och sade: ╜Vem var då den jägaren
som bar in till mig sitt villebråd, så att jag åt av allt, förrän
du kom, och sedan välsignade honom?  Välsignad skall han ock
förbliva.╜
När Esau hörde sin faders ord, brast han ut i högljudd och
bitter klagan och sade till sin fader: ╜Välsigna också mig, min
fader.╜
Men han svarade: ╜Din broder har kommit med svek och tagit din
välsignelse.╜
Då sade han: ╜Han heter ju Jakob, och han har nu också två
gånger bedragit mig.  Min förstfödslorätt har han tagit, och se,
nu har han ock tagit min välsignelse.╜  Och han frågade: ╜Har du
då ingen välsignelse kvar för mig?╜
Isak svarade och sade till Esau: ╜Se, jag har satt honom till en
herre över dig, och alla hans bröder har jag givit honom till
tjänare, och med säd och vin har jag begåvat honom; vad skall
jag då nu göra för dig, min son?╜
Esau sade till sin fader: ╜Har du då allenast den enda
välsignelsen, min fader?  Välsigna också mig, min fader.╜  Och
Esau brast ut i gråt.
Då svarade hans fader Isak och sade till honom:
  ╜Se, fjärran ifrån jordens fetma
      skall din boning vara
  och utan dagg från himmelen ovanefter.
Av ditt svärd skall du leva,
  och du skall tjäna din broder.
  Men det skall ske, när du samlar din kraft,
  att du river hans ok från din hals.╜

Och Esau blev hätsk mot Jakob för den välsignelses skull som
hans fader hade givit honom.  Och Esau sade vid sig själv:
╜Snart skola de dagar komma, då vi få sörja vår fader; då skall
jag dräpa min broder Jakob.╜
När man nu berättade för Rebecka vad hennes äldre son Esau hade
sagt, sände hon och lät kalla till sig sin yngre son Jakob och
sade till honom: ╜Se, din broder Esau vill hämnas på dig och
dräpa dig.
Så hör nu vad jag säger, min son: stå upp och fly till min
broder Laban i Haran,
och stanna någon tid hos honom, till dess din broders
förbittring har upphört,
ja, till dess din broders vrede mot dig har upphört och han
förgäter vad du har gjort mot honom.  Då skall jag sända åstad
och hämta dig därifrån.  Varför skall jag mista eder båda på
samma gång?╜

Och Rebecka sade till Isak: ╜Jag är led vid livet för Hets
döttrars skull.  Om Jakob tager hustru bland Hets döttrar, en
sådan som dessa, någon bland landets döttrar, varför skulle jag
då leva?╜

Då kallade Isak till sig Jakob och välsignade honom; och han
bjöd honom och sade till honom: ╜Tag dig icke till hustru någon
av Kanaans döttrar,
utan stå upp och begiv dig till Paddan-Aram, till Betuels, din
morfaders, hus, och tag dig en hustru därifrån, någon av Labans,
din morbroders, döttrar.
Och må Gud den Allsmäktige välsigna dig och göra dig fruktsam
och föröka dig, så att skaror av folk komma av dig;
må han giva åt dig Abrahams välsignelse, åt dig och din säd med
dig, så att du får taga i besittning det land som Gud har givit
åt Abraham, och där du nu bor såsom främling.╜
Så sände Isak åstad Jakob, och denne begav sig till Paddan-Aram,
till araméen Laban, Betuels son, som var broder till Rebecka,
Jakobs och Esaus moder.

När nu Esau såg att Isak hade välsignat Jakob och sänt honom
till Paddan-Aram för att därifrån taga sig hustru -- ty han hade
välsignat honom och bjudit honom och sagt: ╜Du skall icke taga
till hustru någon av Kanaans döttrar╜ --
och när han såg att Jakob hade lytt sin fader och moder och
begivit sig till Paddan-Aram,
då märkte Esau att Kanaans döttrar misshagade hans fader Isak;
och Esau gick bort till Ismael och tog Mahalat, Abrahams son
Ismaels dotter, Nebajots syster, till hustru åt sig, utöver de
hustrur han förut hade.

Men Jakob begav sig från Beer-Seba på väg till Haran.
Och han kom då till den heliga platsen och stannade där över
natten, ty solen hade gått ned; och han tog en av stenarna på
platsen för att hava den till huvudgärd och lade sig att sova
där.
Då hade han en dröm.  Han såg en stege vara rest på jorden, och
dess övre ände räckte upp till himmelen, och Guds änglar stego
upp och ned på den.
Och se, HERREN stod framför honom och sade: ╜Jag är HERREN,
Abrahams, din faders, Gud och Isaks Gud.  Det land där du ligger
skall jag giva åt dig och din säd.
Och din säd skall bliva såsom stoftet på jorden, och du skall
utbreda dig åt väster och öster och norr och söder, och alla
släkter på jorden skola varda välsignade i dig och i din säd.
Och se, jag är med dig och skall bevara dig, varthelst du går,
och jag skall föra dig tillbaka till detta land; ty jag skall
icke övergiva dig, till dess jag har gjort vad jag har lovat
dig.╜

När Jakob vaknade upp ur sömnen sade han: ╜HERREN är sannerligen
på denna plats, och jag visste det icke!╜
Och han betogs av fruktan och sade: ╜Detta måste vara en helig
plats, här bor förvisso Gud, och här är himmelens port.╜
Och bittida om morgonen stod Jakob upp och tog stenen som han
hade haft till huvudgärd och reste den till en stod och göt olja
därovanpå.
Och han gav den platsen namnet Betel; förut hade staden hetat
Lus.
Och Jakob gjorde ett löfte och sade: ╜Om Gud är med mig och
bevarar mig under den resa som jag nu är stadd på och giver mig
bröd till att äta och kläder till att kläda mig med,
så att jag kommer i frid tillbaka till min faders hus, då skall
HERREN vara min Gud;
och denna sten som jag har rest till en stod skall bliva ett
Guds hus, och av allt vad du giver mig skall jag giva dig
tionde.╜

Och Jakob begav sig åstad på väg till Österlandet.
Där fick han se en brunn på fältet, och vid den lågo tre
fårhjordar, ty ur denna brunn plägade man vattna hjordarna.  Och
stenen som låg över brunnens öppning var stor;
därför plägade man låta alla hjordarna samlas dit och vältrade
så stenen från brunnens öppning och vattnade fåren; sedan lade
man stenen tillbaka på sin plats över brunnens öppning.
Och Jakob sade till männen: ╜Mina bröder, varifrån ären I?╜  De
svarade: ╜Vi äro från Haran.╜
Då sade han till dem: ╜Kännen I Laban, Nahors son?╜  De svarade:
╜Ja.╜
Han frågade dem vidare: ╜Står det väl till med honom?╜  De
svarade: ╜Ja; och se, där kommer hans dotter Rakel med fåren.╜
Han sade: ╜Det är ju ännu full dag; ännu är det icke tid att
samla boskapen.  Vattnen fåren, och fören dem åter i bet.╜
Men de svarade: ╜Vi kunna icke göra det, förrän alla hjordarna
hava blivit samlade och man har vältrat stenen från brunnens
öppning; då vattna vi fåren.╜
Medan han ännu talade med dem, hade Rakel kommit dit med sin
faders får; ty hon plägade vakta dem.
När Jakob fick se sin morbroder Labans dotter Rakel komma med
Labans, hans morbroders, får, gick han fram och vältrade stenen
från brunnens öppning och vattnade sin morbroder Labans får.
Och Jakob kysste Rakel och brast ut i gråt.
Och Jakob omtalade för Rakel att han var hennes faders frände,
och att han var Rebeckas son; och hon skyndade åstad och
omtalade det för sin fader.
Då nu Laban fick höras talas om sin systerson Jakob, skyndade
han emot honom och tog honom i famn och kysste honom och förde
honom in i sitt hus; och han förtäljde för Laban allt som hade
hänt honom.
Och Laban sade till honom: ╜Ja, du är mitt kött och ben.╜  Och
han stannade hos honom en månads tid.

Och Laban sade till Jakob: ╜Du är ju min frände.  Skulle du då
tjäna mig för intet?  Säg mig vad du vill hava i lön?╜
Nu hade Laban två döttrar; den äldre hette Lea, och den yngre
hette Rakel.
Och Leas ögon voro matta, men Rakel hade en skön gestalt och var
skön att skåda.
Och Jakob hade fattat kärlek till Rakel; därför sade han: ╜Jag
vill tjäna dig i sju år för Rakel, din yngre dotter.╜
Laban svarade: ╜Det är bättre att jag giver henne åt dig, än att
jag skulle giva henne åt någon annan; bliv kvar hos mig.╜
Så tjänade Jakob för Rakel i sju år, och det tycktes honom vara
allenast några dagar; så kär hade han henne.

Därefter sade Jakob till Laban: ╜Giv mig min hustru, ty min tid
är nu förlupen; låt mig gå in till henne.╜
Då bjöd Laban tillhopa allt folket på orten och gjorde ett
gästabud.
Men när aftonen kom, tog han sin dotter Lea och förde henne till
honom, och han gick in till henne.
Och Laban gav sin tjänstekvinna Silpa åt sin dotter Lea till
tjänstekvinna.

Om morgonen fick Jakob se att det var Lea.  Då sade han till
Laban: ╜Vad har du gjort mot mig?  Var det icke för Rakel jag
tjänade hos dig?  Varför har du så bedragit mig?╜
Laban svarade: ╜Det är icke sed på vår ort att man giver bort
den yngre före den äldre.
Låt nu dennas bröllopsvecka gå till ända, så vilja vi giva dig
också den andra, mot det att du gör tjänst hos mig i ännu
ytterligare sju år.╜
Och Jakob samtyckte härtill och lät hennes bröllopsvecka gå till
ända.  Sedan gav han honom sin dotter Rakel till hustru.
Och Laban gav sin tjänstekvinna Bilha åt sin dotter Rakel till
tjänstekvinna.
Så gick han in också till Rakel, och han hade Rakel kärare än
Lea.  Sedan tjänade han hos honom i ännu ytterligare sju år.

Men då HERREN såg att Lea var försmådd, gjorde han henne
fruktsam, medan Rakel var ofruktsam.
Och Lea blev havande och födde en son, och hon gav honom namnet
Ruben, ty hon tänkte: ╜HERREN <spärr>har sett till mitt
lidande</spärr>; ja, nu skall min man hava mig kär.╜
Och hon blev åter havande och födde en son.  Då sade hon:
╜HERREN <spärr>har hört</spärr> att jag har varit försmådd,
därför har han givit mig också denne.╜  Och hon gav honom namnet
Simeon.
Och åter blev hon havande och födde en son.  Då sade hon: ╜Nu
skall väl ändå min man <spärr>hålla sig till</spärr> mig; jag
har ju fött honom tre söner.╜  Därav fick denne namnet Levi.
Åter blev hon havande och födde en son.  Då sade hon: ╜Nu vill
jag <spärr>tacka</spärr> HERREN.╜  Därför gav hon honom
namnet Juda.  Sedan upphörde hon att föda.

Då nu Rakel såg att hon icke födde barn åt Jakob, avundades hon
sin syster och sade till Jakob: ╜Skaffa mig barn, eljest dör
jag.╜
Då upptändes Jakobs vrede mot Rakel, och han svarade: ╜Håller du
då mig för Gud?  Det är ju han som förmenar dig livsfrukt.╜
Hon sade: ╜Se, där är min tjänarinna Bilha; gå in till henne,
för att hon må föda barn i mitt sköte, så att genom henne också
jag får avkomma.╜
Så gav hon honom sin tjänstekvinna Bilha till hustru, och Jakob
gick in till henne.
Och Bilha blev havande och födde åt Jakob en son.
Då sade Rakel: ╜<spärr>Gud har skaffat rätt</spärr> åt mig;
han har hört min röst och givit mig en son.╜  Därför gav hon
honom namnet Dan.
Åter blev Bilha, Rakels tjänstekvinna, havande, och hon födde åt
Jakob en andre son.
Då sade Rakel: ╜<spärr>Strider</spärr> om Gud har jag stritt
med min syster och har vunnit seger.╜  Och hon gav honom namnet
Naftali.

Då Lea nu såg att hon hade upphört att föda, tog hon sin
tjänstekvinna Silpa och gav henne åt Jakob till hustru.
Och Silpa, Leas tjänstekvinna, födde åt Jakob en son.
Då sade Lea: ╜Till <spärr>lycka</spärr>!╜  Och hon gav honom
namnet Gad.
Och Silpa, Leas tjänstekvinna, födde åt Jakob en andre son.
Då sade Lea: ╜Till <spärr>sällhet</spärr> för mig!  Ja,
jungfrur skola prisa mig säll.╜  Och hon gav honom namnet Aser.

Men Ruben gick ut en gång vid tiden för veteskörden och fann då
kärleksäpplen på marken och bar dem till sin moder Lea.  Då sade
Rakel till Lea: ╜Giv mig några av din sons kärleksäpplen.╜
Men hon svarade henne: ╜Är det icke nog att du har tagit min
man?  Vill du ock taga min sons kärleksäpplen?╜  Rakel sade: ╜Må
han då i natt ligga hos dig, om jag får din sons kärleksäpplen.╜
När nu Jakob om aftonen kom hem från marken, gick Lea honom till
mötes och sade: ╜Till mig skall du gå in; ty jag har givit min
sons kärleksäpplen såsom lön för dig.╜  Så låg han hos henne den
natten.
Och Gud hörde Lea, så att hon blev havande, och hon födde åt
Jakob en femte son.
Då sade Lea: ╜Gud har givit mig min <spärr>lön</spärr>, för
det att jag gav min tjänstekvinna åt min man.╜  Och hon gav honom
namnet Isaskar.
Åter blev Lea havande, och hon födde åt Jakob en sjätte son.
Då sade Lea: ╜Gud har givit mig en god <spärr>gåva</spärr>.
Nu skall min man <spärr>förbliva boende</spärr> hos mig, ty
jag har fött honom sex söner.╜  Och hon gav honom namnet Sebulon.
Därefter födde hon en dotter och gav henne namnet Dina.

Men Gud tänkte på Rakel; Gud hörde henne och gjorde henne
fruktsam.
Hon blev havande och födde en son.  Då sade hon: ╜Gud <spärr>har
tagit bort</spärr> min smälek.╜
Och hon gav honom namnet Josef, i det hon sade: ╜HERREN
<spärr>give</spärr> mig <spärr>ännu</spärr> en son.╜

Då nu Rakel hade fött Josef, sade Jakob till Laban: ╜Låt mig
fara; jag vill draga hem till min ort och till mitt land.
Giv mig mina hustrur och mina barn, som jag har tjänat dig för,
och låt mig draga hem; du vet ju själv huru jag har tjänat dig.╜
Laban svarade honom: ╜Låt mig finna nåd för dina ögon; jag vet
genom hemliga tecken att HERREN för din skull har välsignat
mig.╜
Och han sade ytterligare: ╜Bestäm vad du vill hava i lön av mig,
så skall jag giva dig det.╜
Han svarade honom: ╜Du vet själv huru jag har tjänat dig, och
vad det har blivit av din boskap under min vård.
Ty helt litet var det som du hade, förrän jag kom, men det har
förökat sig och blivit mycket, ty HERREN har välsignat dig,
varhelst jag har gått fram.  Men när skall jag nu också få göra
något för mitt eget hus?╜
Han svarade: ╜Vad skall jag giva dig?╜  Och Jakob sade: ╜Du
skall icke alls giva mig något.  Om du vill göra mot mig såsom
jag nu säger, så skall jag fortfara att vara herde för din hjord
och vakta den.
Jag vill i dag gå igenom hela din hjord och avskilja ur den alla
spräckliga och brokiga såväl som alla svarta djur bland fåren,
så ock vad som är brokigt och spräckligt bland getterna; sådant
må sedan bliva min lön.
Och när du framdeles kommer för att med egna ögon se vad som har
blivit min lön, då skall min rättfärdighet vara mitt vittne;
alla getter hos mig, som icke äro spräckliga eller brokiga, och
alla får hos mig, som icke äro svarta, de skola räknas såsom
stulna.╜
Då sade Laban: ╜Välan, blive det såsom du har sagt.╜
Och samma dag avskilde han de strimmiga och brokiga bockarna och
alla spräckliga och brokiga getter -- alla djur som något vitt
fanns på -- och alla svarta djur bland fåren; och detta lämnade
han i sina söners vård.
Och han lät ett avstånd av tre dagsresor vara mellan sig och
Jakob.  Och Jakob fick Labans övriga hjord att vakta.

Men Jakob tog sig friska käppar av poppel, mandelträd och lönn
och skalade på dem vita ränder, i det han blottade det vita på
käpparna.
Sedan lade han käpparna, som han hade skalat, i rännorna eller
vattenhoarna dit hjordarna kommo för att dricka, så att djuren
hade dem framför sig; och de hade just sin parningstid, när de
nu kommo för att dricka.
Och djuren parade sig vid käpparna, och så blev djurens avföda
strimmig, spräcklig och brokig.
Därefter avskilde Jakob lammen och ordnade djuren så, att de
vände huvudena mot det som var strimmigt och mot allt som var
svart i Labans hjord; så skaffade han sig egna hjordar, som han
icke lät komma ihop med Labans hjord.
Och så ofta de kraftigare djuren skulle para sig, lade Jakob
käpparna framför djurens ögon i rännorna, så att de parade sig
vid käpparna.
Men när det var de svagare djuren, lade han icke dit dem.
Härigenom tillföllo de svaga Laban och de kraftiga Jakob.
Så blev mannen övermåttan rik; han fick mycken småboskap,
därtill ock tjänarinnor och tjänare, kameler och åsnor.

Men han fick höra huru Labans söner talade så: ╜Jakob har tagit
allt vad vår fader ägde; av det vår fader ägde är det som han
har skaffat sig all denna rikedom.╜
Jakob märkte också att Laban icke såg på honom med samma ögon
som förut.
Och HERREN sade till Jakob: ╜Vänd tillbaka till dina fäders land
och till din släkt; jag skall vara med dig.╜
Då sände Jakob och lät kalla Rakel och Lea ut på marken till sin
hjord;
och han sade till dem: ╜Jag märker att eder fader icke ser på
mig med samma ögon som förut, nu då min faders Gud har varit med
mig.
Och I veten själva att jag har tjänat eder fader av alla mina
krafter;
men eder fader har handlat svikligt mot mig och tio gånger
förändrat min lön.  Dock har Gud icke tillstatt honom att göra
mig något ont.
När han sade: 'De spräckliga skola vara din lön', då fick hela
hjorden spräcklig avföda; och när han sade: 'De strimmiga skola
vara din lön', då fick hela jorden strimmig avföda.
Så tog Gud eder faders boskap och gav den åt mig.
Ty när parningstiden kom, lyfte jag upp mina ögon och fick se i
drömmen att hannarna som betäckte småboskapen voro strimmiga,
spräckliga och fläckiga.
Och Guds ängel sade till mig i drömmen: 'Jakob!'  Jag svarade:
'Här är jag.'
Då sade han: 'Lyft upp dina ögon och se huru alla hannar som
betäcka småboskapen äro strimmiga, spräckliga och fläckiga.  Jag
har ju sett allt vad Laban gör mot dig.
Jag är den Gud som du såg i Betel, där du smorde en stod, och
där du gjorde mig ett löfte.  Stå nu upp och drag ut ur detta
land, och vänd tillbaka till ditt fädernesland.'╜
Då svarade Rakel och Lea och sade till honom: ╜Hava vi numera
någon lott eller arvedel i vår faders hus?
Blevo vi icke av honom aktade såsom främlingar, när han sålde
oss?  Sedan har han ju ock förtärt vad han fick i betalning för
oss.
Ja, all den rikedom som Gud har avhänt vår fader tillhör oss och
våra barn.  Så gör nu allt vad Gud har sagt dig.╜
Då stod Jakob upp och satte sina barn och sina hustrur på
kamelerna
och förde bort med sig all boskap och alla ägodelar som han hade
förvärvat, den boskap han ägde, och som han hade förvärvat i
Paddan-Aram, och begav sig på väg till sin fader Isak i Kanaans
land.
Men Laban hade gått bort för att klippa sina får; då stal Rakel
sin faders husgudar,
och Jakob stal sig undan från araméen Laban, så att han icke lät
denne märka att han ämnade fly.
Så flydde han med allt sitt; han bröt upp och gick över floden
och ställde sin färd mot Gileads berg.

Men på tredje dagen fick Laban veta att Jakob hade flytt.
Då tog han med sig sina fränder och satte efter honom sju
dagsresor och hann upp honom på Gileads berg.
Men Gud kom till araméen Laban i en dröm om natten och sade
till honom: ╜Tag dig till vara för att tala något mot Jakob, vad
det vara må.╜
Och Laban hann upp Jakob.  Denne hade då slagit upp sitt tält på
berget, och Laban med sina fränder hade ock sitt tält uppslaget
på Gileads berg.
Då sade Laban till Jakob: ╜Vad är detta för ett tilltag, att du
har stulit dig undan från mig och fört bort mina döttrar,
likasom vore de tagna med svärd?
Varför dolde du din flykt och stal dig undan från mig?
Därigenom att du icke lät mig veta något därom hindrades jag att
ledsaga dig till vägs med jubel och sång, med pukor och harpor.
Du förunnade mig icke ens att kyssa mina barnbarn och mina
döttrar.  Du har handlat dåraktigt.
Det stode nu i min makt att göra eder ont; men eder faders Gud
sade till mig i natt: 'Tag dig till vara för att tala något mot
Jakob, vad det vara må.'
Och då du nu äntligen ville fara, eftersom du längtade så mycket
till din faders hus, varför skulle du stjäla mina gudar?╜
Då svarade Jakob och sade till Laban: ╜Jag fruktade för dig, ty
jag tänkte att du skulle med våld taga dina döttrar ifrån mig.
Men den som du finner dina gudar hos, han skall icke få behålla
livet.  I våra fränders närvaro må du se efter, om något är ditt
av det jag har i min ägo, och i så fall taga det.╜  Ty Jakob
visste icke att Rakel hade stulit dem.
Då gick Laban in i Jakobs tält, därefter i Leas tält och i de
båda tjänstekvinnornas tält, men fann intet.  Och när han hade
kommit ut ur Leas tält, gick han in i Rakels tält.
Men Rakel hade tagit husgudarna och lagt dem i kamelsadeln och
satt sig därovanpå.  Och Laban sökte igenom hela tältet, men
fann dem icke.
Och hon sade till sin fader: ╜Vredgas icke, min herre, över att
jag ej kan stiga upp för dig, ty det är med mig på kvinnors
vis.╜  Så sökte han efter husgudarna, men fann dem icke.

Då blev Jakob vred och for ut mot Laban; Jakob tog till orda och
sade till Laban: ╜Vari har jag då förbrutit mig eller syndat,
eftersom du så häftigt förföljer mig?
Nu har du genomsökt allt mitt bohag; vad har du där funnit av
bohagsting som tillhöra dig?  Lägg det fram här inför mina
fränder och dina fränder, så att de få döma mellan oss båda.
I tjugu år har jag nu varit hos dig; dina tackor och dina getter
hava icke fött i otid, och av vädurarna i din hjord har jag icke
ätit.
Intet ihjälrivet djur förde jag till dig; jag måste själv
ersätta det; du utkrävde det av mig, evad det var stulet om
dagen eller stulet om natten.
Sådan var min lott: om dagen förtärdes jag av hetta och om
natten av köld, och sömnen flydde mina ögon.
I tjugu år har jag nu varit i ditt hus; jag har tjänat dig i
fjorton år för dina båda döttrar och i sex år för din boskap,
men du har tio gånger förändrat min lön.
Om icke min faders Gud hade varit med mig, Abrahams Gud, han som
ock Isak fruktar, så hade du nu säkert låtit mig fara med tomma
händer.  Men Gud såg mitt lidande och min möda, och han fällde
domen i natt.╜
Då svarade Laban och sade till Jakob: ╜Döttrarna äro mina
döttrar, och barnen äro mina barn, och hjordarna äro mina
hjordar, och allt det du ser är mitt; vad skulle jag då nu kunna
göra mot dessa mina döttrar eller mot barnen som de hava fött?
Så kom nu och låt oss sluta ett förbund med varandra, och må det
vara ett vittne mellan mig och dig.╜

Då tog Jakob en sten och reste den till en stod.
Och Jakob sade till sina fränder: ╜Samlen tillhopa stenar.╜  Och
de togo stenar och gjorde ett röse och höllo måltid där på
röset.
Och Laban kallade det <spärr>Jegar-Sahaduta</spärr>, men Jakob
kallade det <spärr>Galed</spärr>.
Och Laban sade: ╜Detta röse vare i dag vittne mellan mig och
dig.╜  Därav fick det namnet Galed;
men det kallades ock <spärr>Mispa</spärr>, ty han sade:
╜HERREN vare väktare mellan mig och dig, när vi icke mer se
varandra.
Om du behandlar mina döttrar illa eller tager andra hustrur
jämte mina döttrar, så vet, att om ock ingen människa är
tillstädes, så är dock Gud vittne mellan mig och dig.╜
Och Laban sade ytterligare till Jakob: ╜Se, detta röse och
stoden som jag har rest mellan mig och dig --
detta röse vare ett vittne, och stoden vare ett vittne, att jag
icke skall draga till dig förbi detta röse, och att icke heller
du skall draga till mig förbi detta röse och denna stod, med ont
uppsåt.
Abrahams Gud och Nahors Gud, han som var deras faders Gud, han
vare domare mellan oss.╜  Och Jakob svor eden vid honom som hans
fader Isak fruktade.
Och Jakob offrade ett slaktoffer på berget och inbjöd sina
fränder att hålla måltid med sig.  Och de åto och stannade sedan
på berget över natten.
Men om morgonen stod Laban bittida upp, och sedan han hade kysst
sina barnbarn och sina döttrar och välsignat dem, for han sin
väg hem igen.

Men när Jakob drog sin väg fram, mötte honom Guds änglar;
och då Jakob såg dem, sade han: ╜Detta är Guds skara.╜  Och han
gav den platsen namnet <spärr>Mahanaim</spärr>.

Och Jakob sände budbärare framför sig till sin broder Esau i
Seirs land, på Edoms mark;
och han bjöd dem och sade: ╜Så skolen I säga till min herre
Esau: Din tjänare Jakob låter säga: Jag har vistats borta hos
Laban och dröjt kvar där ända till nu;
och jag har fått oxar, åsnor, får, tjänare och tjänarinnor.  Och
jag har nu velat sända bud för att låta min herre veta detta, på
det att jag må finna nåd för dina ögon.╜

När sedan budbärarna kommo tillbaka till Jakob, sade de: ╜Vi
träffade din broder Esau, som redan drager emot dig med fyra
hundra man.╜
Då blev Jakob mycket förskräckt och betogs av ångest; och han
delade sitt folk och fåren och fäkreaturen och kamelerna i två
skaror.
Ty han tänkte: ╜Om Esau överfaller den ena skaran och slår den,
så kan dock den andra skaran undkomma.╜

Och Jakob sade: ╜Min fader Abrahams Gud och min fader Isaks Gud,
HERRE, du som sade till mig: 'Vänd tillbaka till ditt land och
till din släkt, så skall jag göra dig gott',
jag är för ringa till all den nåd och all den trofasthet som du
har bevisat din tjänare; ty jag hade icke mer än min stav, när
jag gick över denna Jordan, och nu har jag förökats till två
skaror.
Rädda mig undan min broder Esaus hand, ty jag fruktar att han
kommer och förgör mig, utan att ens skona mödrar och barn.
Du har själv sagt: 'Jag skall göra dig mycket gott och låta din
säd bliva såsom havets sand, som man icke kan räkna för dess
myckenhets skull.'╜
Och han stannade där den natten.

Och av det han hade förvärvat tog han ut till skänker åt sin
broder Esau
två hundra getter och tjugu bockar, två hundra tackor och tjugu
vädurar,
trettio kamelston som gåvo di, jämte deras föl, därtill fyrtio
kor och tio tjurar samt tjugu åsninnor med tio föl.
Och han lämnade detta i sina tjänares vård, var hjord för sig,
och sade till sina tjänare: ╜Gån framför mig och låten ett
mellanrum vara mellan hjordarna.╜
Och han bjöd den förste och sade: ╜När min broder Esau möter dig
och frågar dig: 'Vem tillhör du, och vart går du, och vem
tillhöra djuren som du driver framför dig?',
då skall du svara: 'De tillhöra din tjänare Jakob; de äro
skänker som han sänder till min herre Esau, och själv kommer han
här efter oss.'╜
Och han bjöd likaledes den andre och den tredje och alla de
övriga som drevo hjordarna: ╜Såsom jag nu har sagt eder skolen I
säga till Esau, när I kommen fram till honom.
Och I skolen vidare säga: 'Också din tjänare Jakob kommer här
efter oss.'╜  Ty han tänkte: ╜Jag vill blidka honom med de
skänker som gå före mig; sedan vill jag själv komma inför hans
ansikte; kanhända tager han då nådigt emot mig.╜
Så kommo nu skänkerna före honom, medan han själv den natten
stannade i lägret.

Men under natten stod han upp och tog sina båda hustrur och
sina båda tjänstekvinnor och sina elva söner och gick över
Jabboks vad.
Han tog dem och förde dem över bäcken och förde tillika över vad
han eljest ägde.
Och Jakob blev ensam kvar.  Då brottades en man med honom, till
dess morgonrodnaden gick upp.
Och när denne såg att han icke kunde övervinna Jakob, gav han
honom ett slag på höftleden, så att höften gick ur led, under
det han brottades med honom.
Och mannen sade: ╜Släpp mig, ty morgonrodnaden går upp.╜  Men
han svarade: ╜Jag släpper dig icke, med mindre du välsignar
mig.╜
Då sade han till honom: ╜Vad är ditt namn?╜  Han svarade:
╜Jakob.╜
Han sade: ╜Du skall icke mer heta Jakob, utan Israel, ty du har
<spärr>kämpat</spärr> med <spärr>Gud</spärr> och med
människor och vunnit seger.╜
Då frågade Jakob och sade: ╜Låt mig veta ditt namn.╜  Han
svarade: ╜Varför frågar du efter mitt namn?╜  Och han välsignade
honom där.
Men Jakob gav platsen namnet <spärr>Peniel</spärr>, ╜ty╜,
sade han, ╜jag har sett Gud ansikte mot ansikte, och dock har
mitt liv blivit räddat╜.
Och när han hade kommit förbi Penuel, såg han solen gå upp; men
han haltade på höften.
Fördenskull äta Israels barn ännu i dag icke höftsenan som
ligger på höftleden, därför nämligen, att han gav Jakob ett slag
på höftleden, på höftsenan.

Och Jakob lyfte upp sina ögon och fick se Esau komma med fyra
hundra man.  Då fördelade han sina barn på Lea och Rakel och de
båda tjänstekvinnorna.
Och han lät tjänstekvinnorna med deras barn gå främst, Lea med
hennes barn därnäst, och Rakel med Josef sist.
Och själv gick han framför dem och bugade sig sju gånger ned
till jorden, till dess han kom fram till sin broder.
Men Esau skyndade emot honom och tog honom i famn och föll honom
om halsen och kysste honom; och de gräto.
Och när han lyfte upp sina ögon och fick se kvinnorna och
barnen, sade han: ╜Vilka äro dessa som du har med dig?╜  Han
svarade: ╜Det är barnen som Gud har beskärt din tjänare.╜
Och tjänstekvinnorna gingo fram med sina barn och bugade sig.
Därefter gick ock Lea fram med sina barn, och de bugade sig.
Slutligen gingo Josef och Rakel fram och bugade sig.
Sedan frågade han: ╜Vad ville du med hela den skara som jag
mötte?╜  Han svarade: ╜Jag ville finna nåd för min herres ögon.╜
Men Esau sade: ╜Jag har nog; behåll du vad du har, min broder.╜
Jakob svarade: ╜Ack nej; om jag har funnit nåd för dina ögon, så
tag emot skänkerna av mig, eftersom jag har fått se ditt
ansikte, likasom såge jag ett gudaväsens ansikte, då du nu så
gunstigt har tagit emot mig.
Tag hälsningsskänkerna som jag har skickat emot dig; ty Gud har
varit mig nådig, och jag har allt fullt upp.╜  Och han bad honom
så enträget, att han tog emot dem.

Och Esau sade: ╜Låt oss bryta upp och draga vidare; jag vill gå
framför dig.╜
Men han svarade honom: ╜Min herre ser själv att barnen äro
späda, och att jag har med mig får och kor som giva di; driver
man dessa för starkt en enda dag, så dör hela hjorden.
Må därför min herre draga åstad före sin tjänare, så vill jag
komma efter i sakta mak, i den mån boskapen, som drives framför
mig, och barnen orka följa med, till dess jag kommer till min
herre i Seir.╜
Då sade Esau: ╜Så vill jag åtminstone lämna kvar hos dig en del
av mitt folk.╜  Men han svarade: ╜Varför så?  Må jag allenast
finna nåd för min herres ögon.╜
Så vände Esau om, samma dag, och tog vägen till Seir.

Men Jakob bröt upp och drog till Suckot och byggde sig där ett
hus.  Och åt sin boskap gjorde han <spärr>lövhyddor</spärr>;
därav fick platsen namnet Suckot.

Och Jakob kom på sin färd ifrån Paddan-Aram välbehållen till
Sikems stad i Kanaans land och slog upp sitt läger utanför
staden.
Och det jordstycke där han hade slagit upp sitt tält köpte han
av Hamors, Sikems faders, barn för hundra kesitor.
Och han reste där ett altare och kallade det
<spärr>El-Elohe-Israel</spärr>.

Men Dina, den dotter som Lea hade fött åt Jakob, gick ut för att
besöka landets döttrar.
Och Sikem, som var son till hivéen Hamor, hövdingen i landet,
fick se henne, och han tog henne till sig och lägrade henne och
kränkte henne.
Och hans hjärta fäste sig vid Dina, Jakobs dotter, och flickan
blev honom kär, och han talade vänligt med flickan.
Och Sikem sade till sin fader Hamor: ╜Skaffa mig denna flicka
till hustru.╜

Och Jakob hade fått höra att hans dotter Dina hade blivit
skändad.  Men eftersom hans söner voro med hans boskap ute på
marken, teg Jakob, till dess de kommo hem.
Så gick nu Hamor, Sikems fader, ut till Jakob för att tala med
honom.
Men när Jakobs söner kommo hem från marken, sedan de hade fått
höra vad som hade hänt, blevo de förbittrade och vredgades
högeligen över att han hade gjort vad som var en galenskap i
Israel, i det han hade lägrat Jakobs dotter -- en otillbörlig
gärning.
Då talade Hamor med dem och sade: ╜Min son Sikems hjärta har
fäst sig vid eder syster; given henne åt honom till hustru.
Och befrynden eder med oss; given edra döttrar åt oss, och
tagen I våra döttrar till hustrur,
och bosätten eder hos oss, ty landet skall ligga öppet för eder;
där mån I bo och draga omkring och förvärva besittningar.╜
Och Sikem sade till hennes fader och hennes bröder: ╜Låten mig
finna nåd för edra ögon; vad I fordren av mig vill jag giva.
Begären av mig huru stor brudgåva och skänk som helst; jag vill
giva vad I fordren av mig; given mig allenast flickan till
hustru.╜
Då svarade Jakobs söner Sikem och hans fader Hamor med listiga
ord, eftersom han hade skändat deras syster Dina,
och sade till dem: ╜Vi kunna icke samtycka till att giva vår
syster åt en man som har förhud; ty sådant hålla vi för
skamligt.
Allenast på det villkoret skola vi göra eder till viljes, att I
bliven såsom vi, därigenom att allt mankön bland eder omskäres.
Då skola vi giva våra döttrar åt eder och själva taga edra
döttrar till hustrur; och vi skola då bo hos eder och bliva med
eder ett enda folk.
Men om I icke viljen lyssna till oss och låta omskära eder, så
skola vi taga vår syster och draga bort.╜
Och Hamor och Sikem, Hamors son, voro till freds med vad de
begärde.

Och den unge mannen dröjde icke att göra så, ty han hade fått
behag till Jakobs dotter.  Och han hade större myndighet än
någon annan i hans faders hus.
Så trädde då Hamor och hans son Sikem upp i sin stads port och
talade till männen i staden och sade:
╜Dessa män äro fredligt sinnade mot oss; må vi alltså låta dem
bo i landet och draga omkring där; landet har ju utrymme nog för
dem.  Vi vilja taga deras döttrar till hustrur åt oss och giva
dem våra döttrar.
Men allenast på det villkoret skola männen göra oss till viljes
och bo hos oss och bliva ett enda folk med oss, att allt mankön
bland oss omskäres, likasom de själva äro omskurna.
Och då bliva ju deras boskap och deras egendom och alla deras
dragare vår tillhörighet.  Må vi fördenskull allenast göra dem
till viljes, så skola de bo kvar hos oss.╜
Och folket lydde Hamor och hans son Sikem, alla de som bodde
inom hans stadsport; allt mankön, så många som bodde inom hans
stadsport, läto omskära sig.

Men på tredje dagen, då de voro sjuka av såren, togo Jakobs två
söner Simeon och Levi, Dinas bröder, var sitt svärd och
överföllo staden oförtänkt och dräpte allt mankön.
Också Hamor och hans son Sikem dräpte de med svärdsegg och togo
Dina ut ur Sikems hus och gingo sin väg.
Och Jakobs söner kommo över de slagna och plundrade staden,
därför att deras syster hade blivit skändad;
de togo deras får och fäkreatur och åsnor, både vad som fanns i
staden och vad som fanns på fältet.
Och allt deras gods och alla deras barn och deras kvinnor förde
de bort såsom byte, tillika med allt annat som fanns i husen.

Men Jakob sade till Simeon och Levi: ╜I haven dragit olycka över
mig, då I nu haven gjort mig förhatlig för landets inbyggare,
kananéerna och perisséerna.  Mitt folk är allenast en ringa hop;
man skall nu församla sig mot mig och slå mig ihjäl; så skall
jag med mitt hus förgöras.╜
Men de svarade: ╜Skulle man då få behandla vår syster såsom en
sköka?╜
Och Gud sade till Jakob: ╜Stå upp, drag till Betel och stanna
där, och res där ett altare åt den Gud som uppenbarade sig för
dig, när du flydde för din broder Esau.╜
Då sade Jakob till sitt husfolk och till alla som voro med
honom: ╜Skaffen bort de främmande gudar som I haven bland eder,
och renen eder och byten om kläder,
och låt oss så stå upp och draga till Betel; där vill jag resa
ett altare åt den Gud som bönhörde mig, när jag var i nöd, och
som var med mig på den väg jag vandrade.╜
Då gåvo de åt Jakob alla de främmande gudar som de hade hos sig,
därtill ock sina örringar; och Jakob grävde ned detta under
terebinten vid Sikem.
Sedan bröto de upp; och en förskräckelse ifrån Gud kom över de
kringliggande städerna, så att man icke förföljde Jakobs söner.
Och Jakob kom till Lus, det är Betel, i Kanaans land, jämte allt
det folk som var med honom.
Och han byggde där ett altare och kallade platsen
<spärr>El-Betel</spärr>, därför att Gud där hade uppenbarat
sig för honom, när han flydde för sin broder.
Och Debora, Rebeckas amma, dog och blev begraven nedanför Betel,
under en ek; den fick namnet Gråtoeken.

Och Gud uppenbarade sig åter för Jakob, när han hade kommit
tillbaka från Paddan-Aram, och välsignade honom.
Och Gud sade till honom: ╜Ditt namn är Jakob; men du skall icke
mer heta Jakob, utan Israel skall vara ditt namn.╜  Så fick han
namnet Israel.
Och Gud sade till honom: ╜Jag är Gud den Allsmäktige; var
fruktsam och föröka dig.  Ett folk, ja, skaror av folk skola
komma av dig, och konungar skola utgå från din länd.
Och det land som jag har givit åt Abraham och Isak skall jag
giva åt dig; åt din säd efter dig skall jag ock giva det landet.
Och Gud for upp från honom, på den plats där han hade talat med
honom.
Men Jakob reste en stod på den plats där han hade talat med
honom, en stod av sten; och han offrade drickoffer därpå och göt
olja över den.
Och Jakob gav åt platsen där Gud hade talat med honom namnet
Betel.
Sedan bröto de upp från Betel.  Och när det ännu var ett stycke
väg fram till Efrat, kom Rakel i barnsnöd, och barnsnöden blev
henne svår.
Då nu hennes barnsnöd var som svårast, sade hjälpkvinnan till
henne: ╜Frukta icke; ty också denna gång får du en son.╜
Men när hon höll på att giva upp andan, ty hon skulle nu dö, gav
hon honom namnet <spärr>Ben-Oni</spärr>; men hans fader kallade honom
<spärr>Benjamin</spärr>.
Så dog Rakel, och hon blev begraven vid vägen till Efrat, det är
Bet-Lehem.
Och Jakob reste en vård på hennes grav; det är den som ännu i
dag kallas Rakels gravvård.

Och Israel bröt upp därifrån och slog upp sitt tält på andra
sidan om Herdetornet.
Och medan Israel bodde där i landet, gick Ruben åstad och
lägrade Bilha, sin faders bihustru; och Israel fick höra det.

Och Jakob hade tolv söner.
Leas söner voro Ruben, Jakobs förstfödde, vidare Simeon, Levi,
Juda, Isaskar och Sebulon.
Rakels söner voro Josef och Benjamin.
Bilhas, Rakels tjänstekvinnas, söner voro Dan och Naftali.
Silpas, Leas tjänstekvinnas, söner voro Gad och Aser.  Dessa
voro Jakobs söner, och de föddes åt honom i Paddan-Aram.
Och Jakob kom till sin fader Isak i Mamre vid Kirjat-Arba, det
är Hebron, där Abraham och Isak hade bott såsom främlingar.
Och Isak levde ett hundra åttio år;
därefter gav Isak upp andan och dog och blev samlad till sina
fäder, gammal och mätt på att leva.  Och hans söner Esau och
Jakob begrovo honom.

Detta är berättelsen om Esaus, det är Edoms, släkt.

Esau hade tagit sina hustrur bland Kanaans döttrar: Ada, hetiten
Elons dotter, och Oholibama, dotter till Ana och sondotter till
hivéen Sibeon,
så ock Basemat, Ismaels dotter, Nebajots syster.
Och Ada födde Elifas åt Esau, men Basemat födde Reguel.
Och Oholibama födde Jeus, Jaelam och Kora.  Dessa voro Esaus
söner, vilka föddes åt honom i Kanaans land.

Och Esau tog sina hustrur, sina söner och döttrar och allt sitt
husfolk, sin boskap och alla sina dragare och all annan egendom
som han hade förvärvat i Kanaans land och drog till ett annat
land och skilde sig så från sin broder Jakob.
Ty deras ägodelar voro så stora att de icke kunde bo
tillsammans; landet där de uppehöllo sig räckte icke till åt
dem, för deras boskapshjordars skull.
Och Esau bosatte sig i Seirs bergsbygd.  Esau, det är densamme
som Edom.

Och detta är berättelsen om Esaus släkt, hans som var stamfader
för edoméerna, i Seirs bergsbygd.
Dessa äro namnen på Esaus söner: Elifas, son till Ada, Esaus
hustru, och Reguel, son till Basemat, Esaus hustru.
Men Elifas' söner voro Teman, Omar, Sefo, Gaetam och Kenas.
Och Timna, som var Elifas', Esaus sons, bihustru, födde Amalek
åt Elifas.  Dessa voro söner till Ada, Esaus hustru.
Men Reguels söner voro dessa: Nahat och Sera, Samma och Missa.
Dessa voro söner till Basemat, Esaus hustru.
Men söner till Oholibama, Esaus hustru, dotter till Ana och
sondotter till Sibeon, voro dessa, som hon födde åt Esau: Jeus,
Jaelam och Kora.

Dessa voro stamfurstarna bland Esaus söner: Elifas', Esaus
förstföddes, söner voro dessa: fursten Teman, fursten Omar,
fursten Sefo, fursten Kenas,
fursten Kora, fursten Gaetam, fursten Amalek.  Dessa voro de
furstar som härstammade från Elifas, i Edoms land; dessa voro
Adas söner.
Och dessa voro Reguels, Esaus sons, söner: fursten Nahat,
fursten Sera, fursten Samma, fursten Missa.  Dessa voro de
furstar som härstammade från Reguel, i Edoms land; dessa voro
söner till Basemat, Esaus hustru.
Och dessa voro Oholibamas, Esaus hustrus, söner: fursten Jeus,
fursten Jaelam, fursten Kora.  Dessa voro de furstar som
härstammade från Oholibama, Anas dotter och Esaus hustru.
Dessa voro Esaus söner, och dessa deras stamfurstar.  Han är
densamme som Edom.

Dessa voro horéen Seirs söner, landets förra inbyggare: Lotan,
Sobal, Sibeon, Ana,
Dison, Eser och Disan.  Dessa voro horéernas, Seirs söners,
stamfurstar i Edoms land.
Men Lotans söner voro Hori och Hemam; och Lotans syster var
Timna.
Och dessa voro Sobals söner: Alvan, Manahat och Ebal, Sefo och
Onam.
Och dessa voro Sibeons söner: Aja och Ana; det var denne Ana som
fann de varma källorna i öknen, när han vaktade sin fader
Sibeons åsnor.
Men dessa voro Anas barn: Dison och Oholibama, Anas dotter.
Och dessa voro Disans söner: Hemdan, Esban, Jitran och Keran.
Och dessa voro Esers söner: Bilhan, Saavan och Akan.
Dessa voro Disans söner: Us och Aran.
Dessa voro horéernas stamfurstar: fursten Lotan, fursten Sobal,
fursten Sibeon, fursten Ana,
fursten Dison, fursten Eser, fursten Disan.  Dessa voro
horéernas stamfurstar i Seirs land, var furste för sig.

Och dessa voro de konungar som regerade i Edoms land, innan ännu
någon israelitisk konung var konung där:
Bela, Beors son, var konung i Edom, och hans stad hette Dinhaba.
När Bela dog, blev Jobab, Seras son, från Bosra, konung efter
honom.
När Jobab dog, blev Husam från temanéernas land konung efter
honom.
När Husam dog, blev Hadad, Bedads son, konung efter honom, han
som slog midjaniterna på Moabs mark; och hans stad hette Avit.
När Hadad dog, blev Samla från Masreka konung efter honom.
När Samla dog, blev Saul från Rehobot vid floden konung efter
honom.
När Saul dog, blev Baal-Hanan, Akbors son, konung efter honom.
När Baal-Hanan, Akbors son, dog, blev Hadar konung efter honom;
och hans stad hette Pagu, och hans hustru hette Mehetabel,
dotter till Matred, som var dotter till Me-Sahab.

Och dessa äro namnen på Esaus stamfurstar, efter deras släkter
och orter, med deras namn: fursten Timna, fursten Alva, fursten
Jetet,
fursten Oholibama, fursten Ela, fursten Pinon,
fursten Kenas, fursten Teman, fursten Mibsar,
fursten Magdiel, fursten Iram.  Dessa voro Edoms stamfurstar,
efter deras boningsorter i det land de hade tagit i besittning
-- hans som ock kallas Esau, edoméernas stamfader.
Men Jakob bosatte sig i det land där hans fader hade bott såsom
främling, nämligen i Kanaans land.

Detta är berättelsen om Jakobs släkt.  När Josef var sjutton år
gammal, gick han, jämte sina bröder, i vall med fåren; han följde
då såsom yngling med Bilhas och Silpas, sin faders hustrurs,
söner.  Och Josef bar fram till deras fader vad ont som sades om
dem.
Men Israel hade Josef kärare än alla sina andra söner, eftersom
han hade fött honom på sin ålderdom; och han lät göra åt honom
en fotsid livklädnad.
Då nu hans bröder sågo att deras fader hade honom kärare än alla
hans bröder, blevo de hätska mot honom och kunde icke tala
vänligt till honom.
Därtill hade Josef en gång en dröm, som han omtalade för sina
bröder; sedan hatade de honom ännu mer.
Han sade nämligen till dem: ╜Hören vilken dröm jag har haft.
Jag tyckte att vi bundo kärvar på fältet; och se, min kärve
reste sig upp och blev stående, och edra kärvar ställde sig runt
omkring och bugade sig för min kärve.╜
Då sade hans bröder till honom: ╜Skulle du bliva vår konung, och
skulle du råda över oss?╜  Och de hatade honom ännu mer för hans
drömmars skull och för vad han hade sagt.

Sedan hade han ännu en annan dröm som han förtäljde för sina
bröder; han sade: ╜Hören, jag har haft ännu en dröm.  Jag tyckte
att solen och månen och elva stjärnor bugade sig för mig.╜
När han förtäljde detta för sin fader och sina bröder, bannade
hans fader honom och sade till honom: ╜Vad är detta för en dröm
som du har haft?  Skulle då jag och din moder och dina bröder
komma och buga oss ned till jorden för dig?╜
Och hans bröder avundades honom; men hans fader bevarade detta i
sitt minne.

Då nu en gång hans bröder hade gått bort för att vakta sin
faders får i Sikem,
sade Israel till Josef: ╜Se, dina bröder vakta fåren i Sikem;
gör dig redo, jag vill sända dig till dem.╜  Han svarade honom:
╜Jag är redo.╜
Då sade han till honom: ╜Gå och se efter, om det står väl till
med dina bröder, och om det står väl till med fåren, och kom
tillbaka till mig med svar.╜  Så sände han honom åstad från
Hebrons dal, och han kom till Sikem.
Där mötte han en man, medan han gick omkring villrådig på
fältet; och mannen frågade honom: ╜Vad söker du?╜
Han svarade: ╜Jag söker efter mina bröder; säg mig var de vakta
sin hjord.╜
Mannen svarade: ╜De hava brutit upp härifrån; ty jag hörde dem
säga: 'Låt oss gå till Dotain.'╜  Då gick Josef vidare efter
sina bröder och fann dem i Dotan.
När de nu på avstånd fingo se honom, innan han ännu hade hunnit
fram till dem, lade de råd om att döda honom.
De sade till varandra: ╜Se, där kommer drömmaren.
Upp, låt oss dräpa honom och kasta honom i en brunn; sedan kunna
vi säga att ett vilddjur har ätit upp honom.  Så få vi se huru
det går med hans drömmar.╜
Men när Ruben hörde detta, ville han rädda honom undan deras
händer och sade: ╜Låt oss icke slå ihjäl honom.╜
Ytterligare sade Ruben till dem: ╜Utgjuten icke blod; kasten
honom i brunnen här i öknen, men bären icke hand på honom.╜  Han
ville nämligen rädda honom undan deras händer och föra honom
tillbaka till hans fader.
Då nu Josef kom fram till sina bröder, togo de av honom hans
livklädnad, den fotsida klädnaden som han hade på sig,
och grepo honom och kastade honom i brunnen; men brunnen var
tom, intet vatten fanns däri.
Därefter satte de sig ned för att äta.  När de då lyfte upp sina
ögon, fingo de se ett tåg av ismaeliter komma från Gilead, och
deras kameler voro lastade med dragantgummi, balsam och
ladanum; de voro på väg med detta ned till Egypten.
Då sade Juda till sina bröder: ╜Vad gagn hava vi därav att vi
dräpa vår broder och dölja hans blod?╜
Nej, låt oss sälja honom till ismaeliterna; må vår hand icke
komma vid honom, ty han är ju vår broder, vårt eget kött.╜  Och
hans bröder lydde honom.
Då nu midjanitiska köpmän kommo där förbi, drogo de upp Josef ur
brunnen; och de sålde Josef för tjugu siklar silver till
ismaeliterna.  Dessa förde så Josef till Egypten.

När sedan Ruben kom tillbaka till brunnen, se, då fanns Josef
icke i brunnen.  Då rev han sönder sina kläder
och vände tillbaka till sina bröder och sade: ╜Gossen är icke
där, vart skall jag nu taga vägen?╜
Men de togo Josefs livklädnad och slaktade en bock och doppade
klädnaden i blodet;
därefter sände de den fotsida livklädnaden hem till sin fader
och läto säga: ╜Denna har vi funnit; se efter, om det är din
sons livklädnad eller icke.╜
Och han kände igen den och sade: ╜Det är min sons livklädnad;
ett vilddjur har ätit upp honom, förvisso är Josef ihjälriven.╜
Och Jakob rev sönder sina kläder och svepte säcktyg om sina
länder och sörjde sin son i lång tid.
Och alla hans söner och alla hans döttrar kommo för att trösta
honom; men han ville icke låta trösta sig, utan sade: ╜Jag skall
med sorg fara ned i dödsriket till min son.╜  Så begrät hans
fader honom.

Men medaniterna förde honom till Egypten och sålde honom till
Potifar, som var hovman hos Farao och hövitsman för drabanterna.
Vid den tiden begav sig Juda åstad bort ifrån sina bröder och
slöt sig till en man i Adullam, som hette Hira.
Där fick Juda se dottern till en kananeisk man som hette Sua,
och han tog henne till sig och gick in till henne.
Och hon blev havande och födde en son, och han fick namnet Er.
Åter blev hon havande och födde en son och gav honom namnet
Onan.
Och hon födde ännu en son, och åt denne gav hon namnet Sela; och
när han föddes, var Juda i Kesib.
Och Juda tog åt Er, sin förstfödde, en hustru som hette Tamar.
Men Er, Judas förstfödde, misshagade HERREN; därför dödade
HERREN honom.
Då sade Juda till Onan: ╜Gå in till din broders hustru, äkta
henne i din broders ställe och skaffa avkomma åt din broder.╜
Men eftersom Onan visste att avkomman icke skulle bliva hans
egen, lät han, när han gick in till sin broders hustru, det
spillas på jorden, för att icke giva avkomma åt sin broder.
Men det misshagade HERREN att han gjorde så; därför dödade han
också honom.
Då sade Juda till sin sonhustru Tamar: ╜Stanna såsom änka i din
faders hus, till dess min son Sela bliver fullvuxen.╜  Han
fruktade nämligen att annars också denne skulle dö, likasom hans
bröder.  Så gick Tamar bort och stannade i sin faders hus.

En lång tid därefter dog Suas dotter, Judas hustru.  Och efter
sorgetidens slut gick Juda med sin vän adullamiten Hira upp till
Timna, för att se efter dem som klippte hans får.
När man nu berättade för Tamar att hennes svärfader gick upp
till Timna för att klippa sina får,
lade hon av sig sina änkekläder och betäckte sig med en slöja
och höljde in sig och satte sig vid porten till Enaim på vägen
till Timna.  Ty hon såg, att fastän Sela var fullvuxen, blev hon
likväl icke given åt honom till hustru.
Då nu Juda fick se henne, trodde han att hon var en sköka; hon
hade ju nämligen sitt ansikte betäckt.
Och han vek av till henne, där hon satt vid vägen, och sade:
╜Kom, låt mig gå in till dig.╜  Ty han visste icke att det var
hans sonhustru.  Hon svarade: ╜Vad vill du giva mig för att få
gå in till mig?╜
Han sade: ╜Jag vill sända dig en killing ur min hjord.╜  Hon
svarade: ╜Ja, om du giver mig pant, till dess du sänder den.╜
Han sade: ╜Vad skall jag då giva dig i pant?╜  Hon svarade: ╜Din
signetring, din snodd och staven som du har i din hand.╜  Då gav
han henne detta och gick in till henne, och hon blev havande
genom honom.
Och hon stod upp och gick därifrån och lade av sin slöja och
klädde sig åter i sina änkekläder.
Och Juda sände killingen med sin vän adullamiten, för att få
igen panten av kvinnan; men denne fann henne icke.
Och han frågade folket där på orten och sade: ╜Var är
tempeltärnan, hon som satt i Enaim vid vägen?╜  De svarade: ╜Här
har ingen tempeltärna varit.╜
Och han kom tillbaka till Juda och sade: ╜Jag har icke funnit
henne; därtill säger folket på orten att ingen tempeltärna har
varit där.╜
Då sade Juda: ╜Må hon då behålla det, så att vi icke draga
smälek över oss.  Jag har nu sänt killingen, men du har icke
funnit henne.╜

Vid pass tre månader därefter blev så berättat för Juda: ╜Din
sonhustru Tamar har bedrivit otukt, och i otukt har hon blivit
havande.╜  Juda sade: ╜Fören ut henne till att brännas.╜
Men när hon fördes ut, sände hon bud till sin svärfader och lät
säga: ╜Genom en man som är ägare till detta har jag blivit
havande.╜  Och hon lät säga: ╜Se efter, vem denna signetring,
dessa snodder och denna stav tillhöra.╜
Och Juda kände igen dem och sade: ╜Hon är i sin rätt mot mig,
eftersom jag icke har givit henne åt min son Sela.╜  Men han kom
icke mer vid henne.

När hon nu skulle föda, se, då funnos tvillingar i hennes liv.
Och i födslostunden stack den ene fram en hand; då tog
hjälpkvinnan en röd tråd och band den om hans hand och sade:
╜Denne kom först fram.╜
Men när han därefter åter drog sin hand tillbaka, se, då kom
hans broder fram; och hon sade: ╜Varför har du trängt dig fram?╜
Och han fick namnet <spärr>Peres</spärr>.
Därefter kom hans broder fram, han som hade den röda tråden om
sin hand, och han fick namnet Sera.

Och Josef fördes ned till Egypten; och Potifar, som var hovman
hos Farao och hövitsman för drabanterna, en egyptisk man, köpte
honom av ismaeliterna som hade fört honom ditned.
Och HERREN var med Josef, så att han blev en lyckosam man.  Och
han vistades i sin herres, egyptierns, hus;
och hans herre såg att HERREN var med honom, ty allt vad han
gjorde lät HERREN lyckas väl under hans hand.
Och Josef fann nåd för hans ögon och fick betjäna honom.  Och
han satte honom över sitt hus, och allt vad han ägde lämnade han
i hans vård.
Och från den stund då han hade satt honom över sitt hus och över
allt vad han ägde, välsignade HERREN egyptierns hus, för Josefs
skull; och HERRENS välsignelse vilade över allt vad han ägde,
hemma och på marken.
Därför överlät han i Josefs vård allt vad han ägde, och sedan
han hade fått honom till sin hjälp, bekymrade han sig icke om
något, utom maten som han själv åt.

Men Josef hade en skön gestalt och var skön att skåda.
Och efter en tid hände sig att hans herres hustru kastade sina
ögon på Josef och sade: ╜Ligg hos mig.╜
Men han ville icke, utan sade till sin herres hustru: ╜Se,
alltsedan min herre har tagit mig till sin hjälp, bekymrar han
sig icke om något i huset, och allt vad han äger har han lämnat
i min vård.
Han har i detta hus icke större makt än jag, och intet annat har
han förbehållit sig än dig allena, eftersom du är hans hustru.
Huru skulle jag då kunna göra så mycket ont och synda mot Gud?╜
Och fastän hon talade sådant dag efter dag till Josef, hörde han
dock icke på henne och ville icke ligga hos henne eller vara med
henne.
Men en dag då han kom in i huset för att förrätta sina sysslor,
och ingen av husfolket var tillstädes därinne,
fattade hon honom i manteln och sade: ╜Ligg hos mig.╜  Men han
lämnade manteln i hennes hand och flydde och kom ut.
Då hon nu såg att han hade lämnat sin mantel i hennes hand och
flytt ut,
ropade hon på sitt husfolk och sade till dem: ╜Sen här, han har
fört hit till oss en hebreisk man, för att denne skulle locka
oss till lättfärdighet.  Han kom in till mig och ville ligga hos
mig; men jag ropade med hög röst.
Och när han hörde att jag hov upp min röst och ropade, lämnade
han sin mantel kvar hos mig och flydde och kom ut.╜
Och hon lät hans mantel ligga kvar hos sig, till dess hans herre
kom hem;
då berättade hon för honom detsamma; hon sade: ╜Den hebreiske
tjänaren som du har fört hit till oss kom in till mig, och
ville locka mig till lättfärdighet.
Men då jag hov upp min röst och ropade, lämnade han sin mantel
kvar hos mig och flydde ut.╜
När nu hans herre hörde vad hans hustru berättade för honom,
nämligen att hans tjänare hade betett sig mot henne på detta
sätt, blev hans vrede upptänd.
Och Josefs herre tog honom och lät sätta honom i det fängelse
där konungens fångar sutto fängslade; där fick han då vara i
fängelse.
Men HERREN var med Josef och förskaffade honom ynnest och lät
honom finna nåd hos föreståndaren för fängelset.
Och föreståndaren för fängelset lät alla fångar som sutto i
fängelset stå under Josefs uppsikt; och allt vad där skulle
göras, det gjordes genom honom.
Föreståndaren för fängelset tog sig alls icke av något som Josef
hade om hand, eftersom HERREN var med denne; och vad han gjorde,
det lät HERREN lyckas väl.
En tid härefter hände sig att den egyptiske konungens munskänk
och hans bagare försyndade sig mot sin herre, konungen av
Egypten.
Och Farao blev förtörnad på sina två hovmän, överste munskänken
och överste bagaren,
och lät sätta dem i förvar i drabanthövitsmannens hus, i samma
fängelse där Josef satt fången.
Och hövitsmannen för drabanterna anställde Josef hos dem till
att betjäna dem; och de sutto där i förvar en tid.

Medan nu den egyptiske konungens munskänk och bagare sutto
fångna i fängelset, hade de båda under samma natt var sin dröm,
vardera med sin särskilda betydelse.
Och när Josef om morgonen kom in till dem, fick han se att de
voro bedrövade.
Då frågade han Faraos hovmän, som med honom sutto i förvar i
hans herres hus: ╜Varför sen I så sorgsna ut i dag?╜
De svarade honom: ╜Vi hava haft en dröm, och ingen finnes, som
kan uttyda den.╜  Josef sade till dem: ╜Att giva uttydningen är
ju Guds sak; förtäljen drömmen för mig.╜

Då förtäljde överste munskänken sin dröm för Josef och sade till
honom: ╜Jag drömde att ett vinträd stod framför mig;
på vinträdet voro tre rankor, och knappt hade det skjutit skott,
så slogo dess blommor ut och dess klasar buro mogna druvor.
Och jag hade Faraos bägare i min hand, och jag tog druvorna och
pressade ut dem i Faraos bägare och gav Farao bägaren i handen.╜
Då sade Josef till honom: ╜Detta är uttydningen: de tre rankorna
betyda tre dagar;
om tre dagar skall Farao upphöja ditt huvud och sätta dig åter
på din plats, så att du får giva Farao bägaren i handen likasom
förut, då du var hans munskänk.
Men tänk på mig, när det går dig väl, så att du gör
barmhärtighet med mig och nämner om mig för Farao och skaffar
mig ut från detta hus;
ty jag är med orätt bortförd från hebréernas land, och icke
heller här har jag gjort något varför jag borde sättas i
fängelse.╜

Då nu överste bagaren såg att Josef hade givit en god uttydning,
sade han till honom: ╜Också jag hade en dröm.  Jag tyckte att
jag bar tre vetebrödskorgar på mitt huvud.
Och i den översta korgen funnos bakverk av alla slag, sådant som
Farao plägar äta; men fåglarna åto därav ur korgen på mitt
huvud.╜
Då svarade Josef och sade: ╜Detta är uttydningen: de tre
korgarna betyda tre dagar;
om tre dagar skall Farao upphöja ditt huvud och taga det av
dig; han skall upphänga dig på trä, och fåglarna skola äta ditt
kött.╜

På tredje dagen därefter, då det var Faraos födelsedag, gjorde
denne ett gästabud för alla sina tjänare.  Då upphöjde han, bland
sina tjänare, såväl överste munskänkens huvud som överste
bagarens.
Han insatte överste munskänken åter i hans ämbete, så att han
fick giva Farao bägaren i handen;
men överste bagaren lät han upphänga, såsom Josef hade sagt dem
i sin uttydning.
Men överste munskänken tänkte icke på Josef, utan glömde honom.
Två år därefter hände sig att Farao hade en dröm.  Han tyckte
sig stå vid Nilfloden.
Och han såg sju kor, vackra och feta, stiga upp ur floden, och
de betade i vassen.
Sedan såg han sju andra kor, fula och magra, stiga upp ur
floden; och de ställde sig bredvid de förra korna på stranden av
floden.
Och de fula och magra korna åto upp de sju vackra och feta
korna.  Därefter vaknade Farao.
Men han somnade åter in och såg då i drömmen sju ax, frodiga och
vackra, växa på samma strå.
Sedan såg han sju andra ax skjuta upp, tunna och svedda av
östanvinden;
och de tunna axen uppslukade de sju frodiga och fulla axen.
Därefter vaknade Farao och fann att det var en dröm.

Då han nu om morgonen var orolig till sinnes, sände han ut och
lät kalla till sig alla spåmän och alla vise i Egypten.  Och
Farao förtäljde sina drömmar för dem; men ingen fanns, som kunde
uttyda dem för Farao.
Då talade överste munskänken till Farao och sade: ╜Jag måste i
dag påminna om mina synder.
När Farao en gång var förtörnad på sina tjänare, satte han mig
jämte överste bagaren i fängelse i drabanthövitsmannens hus.
Då hade vi båda, jag och han, under samma natt en dröm, och våra
drömmar hade var sin särskilda betydelse.
Och jämte oss var där en ung hebré, som var tjänare hos
hövitsmannen för drabanterna.  För honom förtäljde vi våra
drömmar, och han uttydde dem för oss; efter som var och en hade
drömt gav han en uttydning.
Och såsom han uttydde för oss, så gick det.  Jag blev åter
insatt på min plats, och den andre blev upphängd.╜

Då sände Farao och lät kalla Josef till sig; och man skyndade
att föra honom ut ur fängelset.  Och han lät raka sig och bytte
om kläder och kom inför Farao.
Och Farao sade till Josef: ╜Jag har haft en dröm, och ingen
finnes, som kan uttyda den.  Men jag har hört sägas om dig, att
allenast du får höra en dröm, kan du uttyda den.╜
Josef svarade Farao och sade: ╜I min makt står det icke; men Gud
skall giva Farao ett lyckosamt svar.╜
Då sade Farao till Josef: ╜Jag drömde att jag stod på stranden
av Nilfloden.
Och jag såg sju kor stiga upp ur floden, feta och vackra, och de
betade i vassen.
Sedan såg jag sju andra kor stiga upp, avfallna och mycket fula
och magra; i hela Egyptens land har jag icke sett några så fula
som dessa.
Och de magra och fula korna åto upp de sju första, feta korna.
Men när de hade sväljt ned dem, kunde man icke märka att de hade
sväljt ned dem, utan de förblevo fula såsom förut.  Därefter
vaknade jag.
Åter drömde jag och såg då sju ax, fulla och vackra, växa på
samma strå.
Sedan såg jag sju andra ax skjuta upp, förtorkade, tunna och
svedda av östanvinden;
och de tunna axen uppslukade de sju vackra axen.  Detta omtalade
jag för spåmännen; men ingen fanns, som kunde förklara det för
mig.╜

Då sade Josef till Farao: ╜Faraos drömmar hava en och samma
betydelse; vad Gud ämnar göra, det har han förkunnat för Farao.
De sju vackra korna betyda sju år, de sju vackra axen betyda ock
sju år; drömmarna hava en och samma betydelse.
Och de sju magra och fula korna som stego upp efter dessa betyda
sju år, så ock de sju tomma axen, de som voro svedda av
östanvinden; sju hungerår skola nämligen komma.
Detta menade jag, när jag sade till Farao: Vad Gud ämnar göra,
det har han låtit Farao veta.
Se, sju år skola komma med stor ymnighet över hela Egyptens
land.
Men efter dem skola sju hungerår inträffa, sådana, att man skall
förgäta all den förra ymnigheten i Egyptens land, och
hungersnöden skall förtära landet.
Och man skall icke hava något minne av den förra ymnigheten i
landet, för den hungersnöds skull som sedan kommer, ty den skall
bliva mycket svår.
Men att Farao har haft drömmen två gånger, det betyder att detta
är av Gud bestämt, och att Gud skall låta det ske snart.
Må nu alltså Farao utse en förståndig och vis man, som han kan
sätta över Egyptens land.
Må Farao göra så; må han ock förordna tillsyningsmän över landet
och taga upp femtedelen av avkastningen i Egyptens land under de
sju ymniga åren.
Må man under dessa kommande goda år samla in allt som kan tjäna
till föda och hopföra säd under Faraos vård i städerna, för att
tjäna till föda, och må man sedan förvara den,
så att dessa födoämnen finnas att tillgå för landet under de sju
hungerår som skola komma över Egyptens land.  Så skall landet
icke behöva förgås genom hungersnöden.╜

Det talet behagade Farao och alla hans tjänare.
Och Farao sade till sina tjänare: ╜Kunna vi finna någon i vilken
Guds Ande så är som i denne?╜
Och Farao sade till Josef: ╜Eftersom Gud har kungjort för dig
allt detta, finnes ingen som är så förståndig och vis som du.
Du skall förestå mitt hus, och efter dina befallningar skall
allt mitt folk rätta sig; allenast däri att tronen förbliver min
vill jag vara förmer än du.╜
Ytterligare sade Farao till Josef: ╜Jag sätter dig nu över hela
Egyptens land.╜
Och Farao tog ringen av sin hand och satte den på Josefs hand
och lät kläda honom i kläder av fint linne och hängde den
gyllene kedjan om hans hals.
Och han lät honom åka i vagnen närmast efter sin egen, och man
utropade framför honom ╜<spärr>abrek</spärr>╜.  Och han satte
honom över hela Egyptens land.
Och Farao sade till Josef: ╜Jag är Farao; utan din vilja skall
ingen i hela Egyptens land lyfta hand eller fot.╜
Och Farao gav Josef namnet Safenat-Panea och gav honom till
hustru Asenat, dotter till Poti-Fera, prästen i On.  Och Josef
begav sig ut och besåg Egyptens land.

Josef var trettio år gammal, när han stod inför Farao, konungen i
Egypten.  Och Josef gick ut ifrån Farao och färdades omkring i
hela Egyptens land.
Och landet gav under de sju ymniga åren avkastning i överflöd
och under dessa sju år som kommo i Egyptens land samlade han in
allt som kunde tjäna till föda och lade upp det i städerna.  I
var särskild stad lade han upp de födoämnen som man hämtade
ifrån fälten däromkring.
Så hopförde Josef säd i stor myckenhet, såsom sanden i havet,
till dess man måste upphöra att hålla räkning på den, eftersom
det var omöjligt att hålla räkning på den.

Och åt Josef föddes två söner, innan något hungerår kom; de
föddes åt honom av Asenat, dotter till Poti-Fera, prästen i On.
Och Josef gav åt den förstfödde namnet
<spärr>Manasse</spärr>, ╜ty╜, sade han, ╜Gud har låtit mig
förgäta all min olycka och hela min faders hus.╜
Och åt den andre gav han namnet <spärr>Efraim</spärr>, ╜ty╜,
sade han, ╜Gud har gjort mig fruktsam i mitt lidandes land╜.

Men de sju ymniga åren som först hade kommit i Egyptens land
gingo till ända;
sedan begynte de sju hungeråren, såsom Josef hade förutsagt.
Och hungersnöd uppstod i alla andra länder; men i Egyptens land
fanns bröd överallt.
Och när hela Egyptens land begynte hungra och folket ropade till
Farao efter bröd, sade Farao till alla egyptier: ╜Gån till
Josef, och gören vad han säger eder.╜
När nu alltså hungersnöd var över hela landet, öppnade Josef
alla förrådshus och sålde säd åt egyptierna.  Men hungersnöden
blev allt större i Egyptens land;
och från alla länder kom man till Josef i Egypten för att köpa
säd, ty hungersnöden blev allt större i alla länder.

Men när Jakob förnam att säd fanns i Egypten, sade han till sina
söner: ╜Varför stån I så rådlösa?╜
Och han sade vidare: ╜Se, jag har hört att i Egypten finnes säd;
faren ditned och köpen därifrån säd åt oss, för att vi må leva
och icke dö.╜
Då foro tio av Josefs bröder ned för att köpa säd i Egypten.
Men Benjamin, Josefs broder, blev icke av Jakob sänd åstad med
sina bröder, ty han fruktade att någon olycka kunde hända honom.
Så kommo då, bland de andra, också Israels söner för att köpa
säd; ty hungersnöd rådde i Kanaans land.

Och Josef var den som hade att befalla i landet; det var han som
sålde säd åt allt folket i landet.  Då nu Josefs bröder kommo
dit, föllo de ned till jorden på sitt ansikte inför honom.
När då Josef fick se sina bröder, kände han igen dem; men han
ställde sig främmande mot dem och tilltalade dem hårt och
frågade dem: ╜Varifrån kommen I?╜  De svarade: ╜Från Kanaans
land, för att köpa säd till föda åt oss.╜
Och fastän Josef kände igen sina bröder, kände de icke igen
honom.
Men Josef tänkte på de drömmar som han hade drömt om dem.  Och
han sade till dem: ╜I ären spejare, I haven kommit för att se
efter, var landet är utan skydd.╜
De svarade honom: ╜Nej, herre, dina tjänare hava kommit för att
köpa säd till föda åt sig.
Vi äro alla söner till en och samma man; vi äro redliga män,
dina tjänare äro inga spejare.╜
Men han sade till dem: ╜Jo, I haven kommit för att se efter, var
landet är utan skydd.╜
De svarade: ╜Vi, dina tjänare, äro tolv bröder, söner till en
och samma man i Kanaans land; men den yngste är nu hemma hos vår
fader, och en är icke mer till.╜
Josef sade till dem: ╜Det är såsom jag sade eder: I ären
spejare.
Och på detta sätt vill jag pröva eder: så sant Farao lever,
I skolen icke slippa härifrån, med mindre eder yngste broder
kommer hit.
En av eder må fara och hämta hit eder broder.  Men I andra
skolen stanna såsom fångar, för att jag så må pröva om I haven
talat sanning.  Ty om så icke är, då ären I spejare, så sant
Farao lever.╜
Därefter lät han hålla dem allasammans i fängelse under tre
dagar.

Men på tredje dagen sade Josef till dem: ╜Om I viljen leva, så
gören på detta sätt, ty jag fruktar Gud:
ären I redliga män, så må en av eder, I bröder, stanna såsom
fånge i huset där I haven suttit fängslade; men I andra mån fara
eder väg, och föra hem med eder den säd som I haven köpt till
hjälp mot hungersnöden hemma hos eder.
Fören sedan eder yngste broder hit till mig; om så edra ord visa
sig vara sanna, skolen I slippa att dö.╜  Och de måste göra så.
Men de sade till varandra: ╜Förvisso hava vi dragit skuld över
oss genom det som vi gjorde mot vår broder; ty vi sågo hans
själs ångest, när han bad oss om misskund, och vi ville dock
icke lyssna till honom.  Därför hava vi själva kommit i denna
ångest.╜
Ruben svarade dem: ╜Sade jag icke till eder: 'Försynden eder
icke på gossen'?  Men I lyssnaden icke till mig; se, därför
utkräves nu hans blod.╜
Men de visste icke att Josef förstod detta, ty han talade med
dem genom tolk.
Och han vände sig bort ifrån dem och grät.  Sedan vände han sig
åter till dem och talade med dem; och han tog Simeon ut ur deras
krets och lät fängsla honom inför deras ögon.

Och Josef bjöd att man skulle fylla deras säckar med säd, och
lägga vars och ens penningar tillbaka i hans säck, och giva dem
kost för resan.  Och man gjorde så med dem.
Och de lastade säden på sina åsnor och foro därifrån.
Men när vid ett viloställe en av dem öppnade sin säck för att
giva foder åt sin åsna, fick han se sina penningar ligga överst
i säcken.
Då sade han till sina bröder: ╜Mina penningar hava blivit lagda
hit tillbaka; se, de äro här i min säck.╜  Då blevo de utom sig
av häpnad och sågo förskräckta på varandra och sade: ╜Vad har
Gud gjort mot oss!╜

När de kommo hem till sin fader Jakob i Kanaans land, berättade
de för honom allt vad som hade hänt dem och sade:
╜Mannen som var herre där i landet tilltalade oss hårt och
behandlade oss såsom om vi ville bespeja landet.
Men vi sade till honom: 'Vi äro redliga män och inga spejare;
vi äro tolv bröder, samma faders söner; en är icke mer till, och
den yngste är nu hemma hos vår fader i Kanaans land.'
Men mannen som var herre i landet svarade oss: 'Därav skall jag
veta att I ären redliga män: lämnen kvar hos mig en av eder, I
bröder; tagen så vad I haven köpt till hjälp mot hungersnöden
hemma hos eder, och faren eder väg.
Sedan mån I föra eder yngste broder hit till mig, så kan jag
veta att I icke ären spejare, utan redliga män.  Då skall jag
giva eder broder tillbaka åt eder, och I skolen fritt få draga
omkring i landet.

När de sedan tömde sina säckar, fann var och en sin penningpung
i sin säck.  Och då de och deras fader fingo se penningpungarna,
blevo de förskräckta.
Och Jakob, deras fader, sade till dem: ╜I gören mig barnlös;
Josef är borta, Simeon är borta, Benjamin viljen I ock taga
ifrån mig; över mig kommer allt detta.╜
Då svarade Ruben sin fader och sade: ╜Mina båda söner må du
döda, om jag icke för honom åter till dig.  Anförtro honom åt
mig, jag skall föra honom tillbaka till dig.╜
Men han svarade: ╜Min son får icke fara ditned med eder.  Hans
broder är ju död, och han är allena kvar; om nu någon olycka
hände honom på den resa I viljen företaga, så skullen I bringa
mina grå hår med sorg ned i dödsriket.╜
Men hungersnöden var svår i landet.
Och när de hade förtärt den säd som de hade hämtat från Egypten,
sade deras fader till dem: ╜Faren tillbaka och köpen litet säd
till föda åt oss.╜
Men Juda svarade honom och sade: ╜Mannen betygade högtidligt och
sade till oss: 'I fån icke komma inför mitt ansikte, med mindre
eder broder är med eder.'
Om du nu låter vår broder följa med oss, så skola vi fara ned
och köpa säd till föda åt dig.
Men om du icke låter honom följa med oss, så vilja vi icke fara,
ty mannen sade till oss: 'I fån icke komma inför mitt ansikte,
med mindre eder broder är med eder.'
Då sade Israel: ╜Varför gjorden I så illa mot mig och berättaden
för mannen att I haden ännu en broder?╜
De svarade: ╜Mannen frågade noga om oss och vår släkt; han sade:
'Lever eder fader ännu?  Haven I någon broder?'  Då omtalade vi
för honom huru det förhöll sig.  Kunde vi veta att han skulle
säga: 'Fören eder broder hitned'?╜
Och Juda sade till sin fader Israel: ╜Låt ynglingen följa med
mig, så vilja vi stå upp och begiva oss åstad, för att vi må
leva och icke dö, vi själva och du och våra kvinnor och barn.
Jag vill ansvara för honom; av min hand må du utkräva honom.  Om
jag icke för honom åter till dig och ställer honom inför ditt
ansikte, så vill jag vara en syndare inför dig i all min tid.
Sannerligen, om vi icke hade dröjt så länge, så skulle vi redan
hava varit tillbaka för andra gången.╜
Då svarade deras fader Israel dem: ╜Måste det så vara, så gören
nu på detta sätt: tagen av landets bästa frukt i edra säckar och
fören det till mannen såsom skänk, litet balsam och litet
honung, dragantgummi och ladanum, pistacienötter och mandlar.
Och tagen dubbla summan penningar med eder, så att I fören
tillbaka dit med eder de penningar som I haven fått igen överst
i edra säckar.  Kanhända var det ett misstag.
Tagen ock eder broder med eder, och stån upp och faren tillbaka
till mannen.
Men Gud den Allsmäktige låte eder finna barmhärtighet inför
mannen, så att han tillstädjer eder andre broder och Benjamin
att återvända med eder.  Men skall jag bliva barnlös, så må det
då ske.╜

Då togo männen de nämnda skänkerna och togo med sig dubbla
summan penningar, därtill ock Benjamin, och stodo upp och foro
ned till Egypten och trädde inför Josef.
Då nu Josef såg att Benjamin var med dem, sade han till sin
hovmästare: ╜För dessa män in i mitt hus; och låt slakta och
tillreda en måltid, ty männen skola äta middag med mig.╜
Och mannen gjorde såsom Josef hade sagt och förde männen in i
Josefs hus.
Och männen blevo förskräckta, när de fördes in i Josefs hus; de
sade: ╜Det är på grund av penningarna vi föras hitin, de
penningar som förra gången kommo tillbaka i våra säckar; ty han
vill nu störta sig på oss och överfalla oss och göra oss själva
till trälar och taga ifrån oss våra åsnor.╜
Och de trädde fram till Josefs hovmästare och talade med honom
vid ingången till huset
och sade: ╜Hör oss, herre.  När vi förra gången voro härnere för
att köpa säd till föda åt oss
och sedan kommo till ett viloställe och öppnade våra säckar, då
fann var och en av oss sina penningar överst i sin säck,
penningarna till deras fulla vikt; dem hava vi nu fört tillbaka
med oss.
Och vi hava tagit andra penningar med oss för att köpa säd till
föda åt oss.  Vi veta icke vem som hade lagt penningarna i våra
säckar.╜
Då svarade han: ╜Varen vid gott mod, frukten icke; det är eder
Gud och eder faders Gud som har låtit eder finna en skatt i edra
säckar; edra penningar har jag fått.╜  Sedan hämtade han Simeon
ut till dem.
Och han förde männen in i Josefs hus och gav dem vatten till att
två sina fötter och gav foder åt deras åsnor.
Och de ställde i ordning sina skänker, till dess Josef skulle
komma hem om middagen; ty de hade fått höra att de skulle äta
där.

När sedan Josef hade kommit hem, förde de skänkerna, som de hade
med sig, in till honom i huset och föllo ned för honom till
jorden.
Och han hälsade dem och frågade: ╜Står det väl till med eder
fader, den gamle, som I taladen om?  Lever han ännu?╜
De svarade: ╜Ja, det står väl till med vår fader, din tjänare;
han lever ännu.╜  Och de bugade sig och föllo ned för honom.
Och när han lyfte upp sina ögon och fick se sin broder Benjamin,
sin moders son, frågade han: ╜Är detta eder yngste broder, den
som I taladen om med mig?╜  Därpå sade han: ╜Gud vare dig nådig,
min son.╜
Men Josef bröt av sitt tal, ty hans hjärta upprördes av kärlek
till brodern, och han sökte tillfälle att gråta ut och gick in i
sin kammare och grät där.
Därefter, sedan han hade tvagit sitt ansikte, gick han åter ut
och betvang sig och sade: ╜Sätten fram mat.╜
Och de satte fram särskilt för honom och särskilt för dem och
särskilt för de egyptier som åto tillsammans med honom; ty
egyptierna få icke äta tillsammans med hebréerna; sådant är
nämligen en styggelse för egyptierna.
Och de fingo sina platser mitt emot honom, den förstfödde främst
såsom den förstfödde, sedan de yngre, var och en efter sin
ålder; och männen sågo med förundran på varandra.
Och han lät bära till dem av rätterna på sitt bord, och Benjamin
fick fem gånger så mycket som var och en av de andra.  Och de
drucko sig glada med honom.
Därefter bjöd han sin hovmästare och sade: ╜Fyll männens säckar
med säd, så mycket de kunna rymma, och lägg vars och ens
penningar överst i hans säck.
Och min bägare, silverbägaren, skall du lägga överst i den
yngstes säck, tillika med penningarna för hans säd.╜  Och han
gjorde såsom Josef hade sagt.
Om morgonen, då det blev dager, fingo männen fara med sina
åsnor.
Men när de hade kommit ett litet stycke utom staden, sade Josef
till sin hovmästare: ╜Stå upp och sätt efter männen; och när du
hinner upp dem, så säg till dem: 'Varför haven I lönat gott med
ont?
Det är ju just den bägaren som min herre dricker ur, och som han
plägar spå med.  Det är en ond gärning I haven gjort.'╜

När han nu hann upp dem, sade han detta till dem.
Då svarade de honom: ╜Varför talar min herre så?  Bort det, att
dina tjänare skulle göra sådant!
De penningar som vi funno överst i våra säckar hava vi ju fört
tillbaka till dig från Kanaans land.  Huru skulle vi då kunna
vilja stjäla silver eller guld ur din herres hus?
Den bland dina tjänare, som den finnes hos, han må dö; därtill
vilja vi andra bliva min herres trälar.╜
Han svarade: ╜Ja, vare det såsom I haven sagt; den som den
finnes hos, han skall bliva min träl.  Men I andra skolen vara
utan skuld.╜
Och de skyndade sig att lyfta ned var och en sin säck på jorden,
och öppnade var och en sin säck.
Och han begynte att söka hos den äldste och slutade hos den
yngste; och bägaren fanns i Benjamins säck.
Då revo de sönder sina kläder och lastade åter var och en sin
åsna och vände tillbaka till staden.

Och Juda och hans bröder gingo in i Josefs hus, där denne ännu
var kvar; och de föllo ned till jorden för honom.
Då sade Josef till dem: ╜Vad haven I gjort!  Förstoden I icke
att en man sådan som jag kan spå?╜
Juda svarade: Vad skola vi säga till min herre, vad skola vi
tala, och huru skola vi rättfärdiga oss?  Gud har funnit dina
tjänares missgärning.  Se, vi äro min herres trälar, vi andra
såväl som den som bägaren har blivit funnen hos.╜
Men han sade: ╜Bort det, att jag skulle så göra!  Den som
bägaren har blivit funnen hos, han skall bliva min träl.  Men I
andra mån i frid fara hem till eder fader.╜

Då trädde Juda fram till honom och sade: ╜Hör mig, herre; låt
din tjänare tala ett ord inför min herre, och må din vrede icke
upptändas mot din tjänare; ty du är såsom Farao.
Min herre frågade sina tjänare och sade: 'Haven I eder fader
eller någon broder ännu därhemma?'
Och vi svarade min herre: 'Vi hava en åldrig fader och en son
till honom, en som är född på hans ålderdom och ännu är ung; men
en broder till denne är död, så att han allena är kvar efter sin
moder, och hans fader har honom kär.'
Då sade du till dina tjänare: 'Fören honom hitned till mig, så
att jag kan låta mitt öga vila på honom.'
Och vi svarade min herre: 'Ynglingen kan icke lämna sin fader,
ty om han lämnade sin fader, så skulle denne dö.'
Men du sade till dina tjänare: 'Om eder yngste broder icke
följer med eder hitned, så fån I icke mer komma inför mitt
ansikte.'
När vi därefter hade kommit hem till din tjänare, min fader,
berättade vi för honom vad min herre hade sagt.
Och när sedan vår fader sade: 'Faren tillbaka och köpen litet
säd till föda åt oss',
svarade vi: 'Vi kunna icke fara ditned; allenast på det
villkoret vilja vi fara, att vår yngste broder följer med oss;
ty vi få icke komma inför mannens ansikte om vår yngste broder
icke är med oss.
Men din tjänare, min fader, sade till oss: 'I veten själva att
min hustru har fött åt mig två söner,
och den ene gick bort ifrån mig, och jag sade: förvisso är han
ihjälriven.  Och jag har icke sett honom sedan den tiden.
Om I nu tagen också denne ifrån mig och någon olycka händer
honom, så skolen I bringa mina grå hår med jämmer ned i
dödsriket.'
Om jag alltså kommer hem till din tjänare, min fader, utan att
vi hava med oss ynglingen, som vår faders hjärta är så fäst vid,
då bliver det hans död, när han ser att ynglingen icke är med;
och dina tjänare skulle så bringa din tjänares, vår faders, grå
hår med sorg ned i dödsriket.
Ty jag, din tjänare, har lovat min fader att ansvara för
ynglingen och har sagt, att om jag icke för denne till honom
igen, så vill jag vara en syndare inför min fader i all min tid.
Låt nu därför din tjänare stanna kvar hos min herre såsom träl,
i ynglingens ställe, men låt ynglingen fara hem med sina bröder.
Ty huru skulle jag kunna fara hem till min fader utan att hava
ynglingen med mig?  Jag förmår icke se den jämmer som då skulle
komma över min fader.╜
Då kunde Josef icke längre betvinga sig inför alla dem som stodo
omkring honom.  Han ropade: ╜Må alla gå ut härifrån.╜  Och ingen
fick stanna inne hos Josef, när han gav sig till känna för sina
bröder.
Och han brast ut i högljudd gråt, så att egyptierna hörde det;
också Faraos husfolk hörde det.
Och Josef sade till sina bröder: ╜Jag är Josef.  Lever min fader
ännu?╜  Men hans bröder kunde icke svara honom, så förskräckta
blevo de för honom.
Då sade Josef till sina bröder: ╜Kommen hitfram till mig.╜  Och
när de kommo fram, sade han: ╜Jag är Josef, eder broder, som I
sålden till Egypten.
Men varen nu icke bedrövade och grämen eder icke däröver att I
haven sålt mig hit: ty för att bevara människors liv har Gud
sänt mig hit före eder.
I två år har nu hungersnöd varit i landet, och ännu återstå fem
år under vilka man varken skall plöja eller skörda.
Men Gud sände mig hit före eder, för att I skullen bliva kvar på
jorden och behållas vid liv, ja, till räddning för många.
Så haven nu icke I sänt mig hit, utan Gud; och han har gjort mig
till Faraos högste rådgivare och till en herre över hela hans
hus och till en furste över hela Egyptens land.
Skynden eder nu och faren hem till min fader, och sägen till
honom: 'Så säger din son Josef: Gud har satt mig till en herre
över hela Egypten; kom ned till mig, dröj icke.
Du skall få bo i landet Gosen och vara mig nära, du med dina
barn och barnbarn, dina får och fäkreatur och allt vad som
tillhör dig.
Jag vill där försörja dig -- ty ännu återstå fem hungerår -- så
att varken du eller ditt hus eller någon som hör dig till skall
lida nöd.
I sen ju med egna ögon, också min broder Benjamin ser med egna
ögon, att det är jag, som med egen mun talar till eder.
Berätten nu för min fader om all min härlighet i Egypten och om
allt vad I haven sett, och skynden eder att föra min fader
hitned.╜
Så föll han sin broder Benjamin om halsen och grät, och Benjamin
grät vid hans hals.
Och han kysste alla sina bröder och grät i deras armar.  Sedan
samtalade hans bröder med honom.

När nu det ryktet spordes i Faraos hus, att Josefs bröder hade
kommit, behagade detta Farao och hans tjänare väl.
Och Farao sade till Josef: ╜Säg till dina bröder: 'Detta skolen
I göra: lasten edra djur och faren hem till Kanaans land;
hämten så eder fader och edert folk och kommen hit till mig, så
skall jag giva eder det bästa som finnes i Egyptens land, och I
skolen få äta av landets fetma.'
Alltså bjuder jag dig nu att säga: 'Detta skolen I göra: tagen
eder vagnar i Egyptens land för edra späda barn och edra
hustrur, och hämten eder fader och kommen hit.
Och bekymren eder icke om edert bohag; ty det bästa som finnes i
hela Egyptens land skall höra eder till.'╜
Israels söner gjorde så, och Josef gav dem vagnar, efter Faraos
befallning, och gav dem kost för resan.
Och han gav åt dem alla var sin högtidsdräkt, men åt Benjamin
gav han tre hundra siklar silver och fem högtidsdräkter.
Och till sin fader sände han likaledes gåvor: tio åsnor, lastade
med det bästa Egypten hade, och tio åsninnor, lastade med säd
och bröd och andra livsmedel åt hans fader för resan.
Därefter lät han sina bröder fara, och de begåvo sig åstad; och
han sade till dem: ╜Kiven icke på vägen.╜
Så foro de upp från Egypten och kommo till sin fader Jakob i
Kanaans land;
och de berättade för honom och sade: ╜Josef lever ännu, och han
är en furste över hela Egyptens land.╜  Då greps hans hjärta av
vanmakt, ty han kunde icke tro dem.
Men när de omtalade för honom allt vad Josef hade sagt till dem,
och när han såg vagnarna som Josef hade sänt för att hämta
honom, då fick deras fader Jakobs ande åter liv.
Och Israel sade: ╜Det är nog; min son Josef lever ännu.  Jag
vill fara och se honom, förrän jag dör.╜
Och Israel bröt upp med allt vad honom tillhörde.  Och när han
kom till Beer-Seba, offrade han slaktoffer åt sin fader Isaks
Gud.
Och Gud talade till Israel i en syn om natten; han sade: ╜Jakob!
Jakob!╜  Han svarade: ╜Här är jag.╜
Då sade han: ╜Jag är Gud, din faders Gud; frukta icke för att
draga ned till Egypten, ty där skall jag göra dig till ett stort
folk.
Jag skall själv draga ned med dig till Egypten, jag skall ock
föra dig åter upp därifrån; och Josefs hand skall tillsluta dina
ögon.╜

Och Jakob bröt upp från Beer-Seba; och Israels söner satte sin
fader Jakob och sina späda barn och sina hustrur på vagnarna som
Farao hade sänt för att hämta honom.
Och de togo sin boskap och de ägodelar som de hade förvärvat i
Kanaans land och kommo så till Egypten, Jakob och alla hans
avkomlingar med honom.
Sina söner och sonsöner, sina döttrar och sondöttrar, alla sina
avkomlingar, förde han med sig till Egypten.

Dessa äro namnen på Israels barn som kommo till Egypten:

Jakob och hans söner.  Jakobs förstfödde var Ruben,
och Rubens söner voro Hanok, Pallu, Hesron och Karmi.
Simeons söner voro Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jakin, Sohar och Saul,
den kananeiska kvinnans son.
Levis söner voro Gerson, Kehat och Merari.
Judas söner voro Er, Onan, Sela, Peres och Sera -- men Er och
Onan dogo i Kanaans land -- och Peres' söner voro Hesron och
Hamul.
Isaskars söner voro Tola, Puva, Job och Simron.
Sebulons söner voro Sered, Elon och Jaleel.
Dessa voro Leas söner, de som hon födde åt Jakob i Paddan-Aram;
tillika födde hon åt honom dottern Dina.  Söner och döttrar
utgjorde tillsammans trettiotre personer.
Gads söner voro Sifjon och Haggi, Suni och Esbon, Eri och Arodi
och Areli.
Asers söner voro Jimna, Jisva, Jisvi och Beria; och deras syster
var Sera; men Berias söner voro Heber och Malkiel.
Dessa voro söner till Silpa, som Laban hade givit åt sin dotter
Lea, och dessa födde hon åt Jakob, sexton personer.
Rakels, Jakobs hustrus, söner voro Josef och Benjamin.
Och de söner som föddes åt Josef i Egyptens land voro Manasse
och Efraim; de föddes åt honom av Asenat, dotter till Poti-Fera,
prästen i On.
Och Benjamins söner voro Bela, Beker och Asbel, Gera och Naaman,
Ehi och Ros, Muppim och Huppim och Ard.
Dessa voro Rakels söner, de som föddes åt Jakob, tillsammans
fjorton personer.
Dans söner voro Husim.
Naftalis söner voro Jaseel, Guni, Jeser och Sillem.
Dessa voro söner till Bilha, som Laban hade givit åt sin dotter
Rakel, och dessa födde hon åt Jakob, tillsammans sju personer.
De som kommo med Jakob till Egypten, de som hade utgått från
hans länd, utgjorde alla tillsammans sextiosex personer, förutom
Jakobs sonhustrur.
Och Josefs söner, vilka föddes åt honom i Egypten, voro två.  De
personer av Jakobs hus, som kommo till Egypten, utgjorde
tillsammans sjuttio.

Och han sände Juda framför sig till Josef, för att denne skulle
visa honom vägen till Gosen.  Så kommo de till landet Gosen.
Och Josef lät spänna för sin vagn och for upp till Gosen för att
möta sin fader Israel.  Och när han kom fram till honom, föll
han honom om halsen och grät länge vid hans hals.
Och Israel sade till Josef: ╜Nu vill jag gärna dö, sedan jag har
sett ditt ansikte och sett att du ännu lever.╜

Därefter sade Josef till sina bröder och sin faders folk: ╜Jag
vill fara upp och berätta för Farao och säga till honom: 'Mina
bröder och min faders folk, som hittills hava bott i Kanaans
land, hava kommit till mig.
Och dessa män äro fårherdar, ty de hava idkat boskapsskötsel;
och sina får och fäkreatur och allt vad de äga hava de fört med
sig.'
När sedan Farao kallar eder till sig och frågar: 'Vad är edert
yrke?',
skolen I svara: 'Vi, dina tjänare, hava idkat boskapsskötsel
från vår ungdom ända till nu, vi såväl som våra fäder.'  Så
skolen I få bo i landet Gosen; ty alla fårherdar äro en
styggelse för egyptierna.╜
Och Josef kom och berättade för Farao och sade: ╜Min fader och
mina bröder hava kommit från Kanaans land med sina får och
fäkreatur och allt vad de äga; och de äro nu i landet Gosen.╜
Och han hade bland sina bröder tagit ut fem män; dem ställde han
fram inför Farao.
Då frågade Farao hans bröder: ╜Vad är edert yrke?╜  De svarade
Farao: ╜Dina tjänare äro fårherdar, såsom ock våra fäder hava
varit.╜
Och de sade ytterligare till Farao: ╜Vi hava kommit för att bo
någon tid här i landet; ty dina tjänare hade intet bete för sina
får, eftersom hungersnöden är så svår i Kanaans land.  Så låt nu
dina tjänare bo i landet Gosen.╜
Då sade Farao till Josef: ╜Din fader och dina bröder hava alltså
nu kommit till dig.
Egyptens land ligger öppet för dig; i den bästa delen av landet
må du låta din fader och dina bröder bo.  Må de bo i landet
Gosen, och ifall du vet om några bland dem att de äro dugande
män, så sätt dessa till uppsyningsmän över min boskap.╜

Sedan hämtade Josef sin fader Jakob och förde honom fram inför
Farao, och Jakob hälsade Farao.
Men Farao frågade Jakob: ╜Huru hög är din ålder?╜
Jakob svarade Farao: ╜Min vandringstid har varat ett hundra
trettio år.  Få och onda hava mina levnadsår varit, de nå icke
upp till antalet av mina fäders levnadsår under deras
vandringstid.╜
Och Jakob tog avsked av Farao och gick ut ifrån honom.
Men Josef lät sin fader och sina bröder bo i Egyptens land och
gav dem besittning där, i den bästa delen av landet, i landet
Rameses, såsom Farao hade bjudit.
Och Josef försörjde sin fader och sina bröder och hela sin
faders hus, och gav var och en underhåll efter antalet av hans
barn.

Men ingenstädes i landet fanns bröd, ty hungersnöden var mycket
svår, så att Egyptens land och Kanaans land försmäktade av
hunger.
Och för den säd som folket köpte samlade Josef till sig alla
penningar som funnos i Egyptens land och i Kanaans land; och
Josef lät föra penningarna in i Faraos hus.
Men när penningarna togo slut i Egyptens land och i Kanaans
land, kommo alla egyptier till Josef och sade: ╜Giv oss bröd;
icke vill du väl att vi skola dö i din åsyn?  Vi hava ju inga
penningar mer.╜
Josef svarade: ╜Fören hit eder boskap, så skall jag giva eder
bröd i utbyte mot eder boskap, om I icke mer haven några
penningar.╜
Då förde de sin boskap till Josef, och Josef gav dem bröd i
utbyte mot deras hästar, får, fäkreatur och åsnor.  Så underhöll
han dem det året och gav dem bröd i utbyte mot all deras boskap.
Så gick detta år till ända.  Men det följande året kommo de åter
till honom och sade till honom: ╜Vi vilja icke dölja det för
min herre: penningarna äro slut, och den boskap vi ägde har
kommit i min herres ägo; intet annat finnes nu kvar att giva åt
min herre än våra kroppar och vår jord.
Icke vill du att vi skola förgås inför dina ögon, vi med vår
åkerjord?  Köp oss och vår jord för bröd, så vilja vi med vår
jord bliva Faraos trälar; giv oss allenast utsäde, för att vi må
leva och icke dö, och för att jorden icke må läggas öde.╜
Då köpte Josef all jord i Egypten åt Farao; ty egyptierna sålde
var och en sin åker, eftersom hungersnöden så svårt tryckte dem.
Så blev jorden Faraos egendom.
Och folket förflyttade han till städerna, från den ena ändan av
Egyptens område till den andra.
Allenast prästernas jord köpte han icke, ty prästerna hade sitt
bestämda underhåll av Farao, och de levde av det bestämda
underhåll som Farao gav dem; därför behövde de icke sälja sin
jord.
Och Josef sade till folket: ╜Se, jag har nu köpt eder och eder
jord åt Farao.  Där haven I utsäde; besån nu jorden.
Och när grödan kommer in, skolen I giva en femtedel åt Farao;
men fyra femtedelar skolen I själva hava till utsäde på åkern
och till föda för eder och dem som I haven i edra hus och till
föda för edra barn.╜
De svarade: ╜Du har behållit oss vid liv; låt oss finna nåd för
min herres ögon, så vilja vi vara Faraos trälar.╜
Så gjorde Josef det till en stadga, som ännu i dag gäller för
Egyptens jord, att man skulle giva femtedelen åt Farao.
Allenast prästernas jord blev icke Faraos egendom.

Så bodde nu Israel i Egyptens land, i landet Gosen; och de fingo
sina besittningar där och voro fruktsamma och förökade sig
storligen.
Och Jakob levde sjutton år i Egyptens land, så att hans
levnadsålder blev ett hundra fyrtiosju år.
Då nu tiden närmade sig att Israel skulle dö, kallade han till
sig sin son Josef och sade till honom: ╜Om jag har funnit nåd
för dina ögon, så lägg din hand under min länd och lova att visa
mig din kärlek och trofasthet därmed att du icke begraver mig i
Egypten;
fastmer, när jag har gått till vila hos mina fäder, skall du
föra mig från Egypten och begrava mig i deras grav.╜  Han
svarade: ╜Jag skall göra såsom du har sagt.╜
Men han sade: ╜Giv mig din ed därpå.╜  Och han gav honom sin ed.
Då tillbad Israel, böjd mot sängens huvudgärd.
En tid härefter blev det sagt till Josef: ╜Din fader är nu
sjuk.╜  Då tog han med sig sina båda söner, Manasse och Efraim.
Och man berättade för Jakob och sade: ╜Din son Josef har nu
kommit till dig.╜  Då tog Israel styrka till sig och satte sig
upp i sängen.
Och Jakob sade till Josef: ╜Gud den Allsmäktige uppenbarade sig
för mig i Lus i Kanaans land och välsignade mig
och sade till mig: 'Se, jag skall göra dig fruktsam och föröka
dig och låta skaror av folk komma av dig, och skall giva åt din
säd efter dig detta land till evärdlig besittning.'
Dina båda söner, som äro födda åt dig i Egyptens land, innan jag
kom hit till dig i Egypten, de skola nu vara mina: Efraim och
Manasse skola vara mina, likasom Ruben och Simeon.
Men de barn som du har fött efter dem skola vara dina; de skola
bära sina bröders namn i dessas arvedel.
Se, när jag kom från Paddan, dog Rakel ifrån mig i Kanaans land,
under resan, då det ännu var ett stycke väg fram till Efrat; och
jag begrov henne där vid vägen till Efrat.╜  Stället heter nu
Bet-Lehem.

Då nu Israel fick se Josefs söner, sade han: ╜Vilka äro dessa?╜
Josef svarade sin fader: ╜Det är mina söner, som Gud har givit
mig här.╜  Då sade han: ╜För dem hit till mig, på det att jag må
välsigna dem.╜
Och Israels ögon voro skumma av ålder, så att han icke kunde se.
Så förde han dem då fram till honom, och han kysste dem och tog
dem i famn.
Och Israel sade till Josef: ╜Jag hade icke tänkt att jag skulle
få se ditt ansikte, men nu har Gud låtit mig se till och med
avkomlingar av dig.╜
Och Josef förde dem bort ifrån hans knän och föll ned till
jorden på sitt ansikte.
Sedan tog Josef dem båda vid handen, Efraim i sin högra hand,
till vänster framför Israel, och Manasse i sin vänstra hand,
till höger framför Israel, och förde dem så fram till honom.
Men Israel räckte ut sin högra hand och lade den på Efraims
huvud, fastän han var den yngre, och sin vänstra hand på
Manasses huvud; han lade alltså sina händer korsvis, ty Manasse
var den förstfödde.
Och han välsignade Josef och sade: ╜Den Gud inför vilken mina
fäder, Abraham och Isak, hava vandrat, den Gud som har varit min
herde från min födelse ända till denna dag,
den ängel som har förlossat mig från allt ont, han välsigne
dessa barn; och må de uppkallas efter mitt och mina fäders,
Abrahams och Isaks, namn, och må de föröka sig och bliva talrika
på jorden.╜
Men när Josef såg att hans fader lade sin högra hand på Efraims
huvud, misshagade detta honom, och han fattade sin faders hand
och ville flytta den från Efraims huvud på Manasses huvud.
Och Josef sade till sin fader: ╜Icke så, min fader; denne är den
förstfödde, lägg din högra hand på hans huvud.╜
Men hans fader ville icke; han sade: ╜Jag vet det, min son, jag
vet det; också av honom skall ett folk komma, också han skall
bliva stor; men hans yngre broder skall dock bliva större än
han, och hans avkomma skall bliva ett talrikt folk.╜
Så välsignade han dem på den dagen och sade: ╜Med ditt namn
skall Israel välsigna, så att man skall säga: Gud göre dig lik
Efraim och Manasse.╜  Så satte han Efraim framför Manasse.

Och Israel sade till Josef: ╜Se, jag dör; men Gud skall vara med
eder och föra eder tillbaka till edra fäders land.
Och utöver vad jag giver dina bröder giver jag dig en särskild
<spärr>höjdsträcka</spärr> som jag med mitt svärd och min
båge har tagit från amoréerna.╜

Och Jakob kallade sina söner till sig och sade: Församlen eder,
på det att jag må förkunna eder vad som skall hända eder i
kommande dagar:

Kommen tillhopa och hören, I Jakobs söner;
  hören på eder fader Israel.

Ruben, min förstfödde är du,
  min kraft och min styrkas förstling,
  främst i myndighet och främst i makt.
Du sjuder över såsom vatten,
  du skall icke bliva den främste,
  ty du besteg din faders läger;
  då gjorde du vad skändligt var.
  Ja, min bädd besteg han!

Simeon och Levi äro bröder;
  deras vapen äro våldets verktyg.
Min själ inlåte sig ej i deras råd,
  min ära tage ingen del i deras samkväm;
  ty i sin vrede dräpte de män,
  och i sitt överdåd stympade de oxar.
Förbannad vare deras vrede, som är så våldsam,
  och deras grymhet, som är så hård!
  Jag skall förströ dem i Jakob,
  jag skall förskingra dem i Israel.

Dig, Juda, dig skola dina bröder <spärr>prisa</spärr>;
  din hand skall vara på dina fienders nacke,
  för dig skola din faders söner buga sig.
Ett ungt lejon är Juda;
  från rivet byte har du dragit ditupp, min son.
  Han har lagt sig ned, han vilar såsom ett lejon,
  såsom en lejoninna -- vem vågar oroa honom?
Spiran skall icke vika ifrån Juda,
  icke härskarstaven ifrån hans fötter,
  till dess han kommer till Silo
  och folken bliva honom hörsamma.
Han binder vid vinträdet sin åsna,
  vid ädla rankan sin åsninnas fåle.
  Han tvår sina kläder i vin,
  sin mantel i druvors blod.
Hans ögon äro dunkla av vin
  och hans tänder vita av mjölk.

Sebulon skall bo vid havets strand,
  vid stranden, där skeppen ligga;
  sin sida skall han vända mot Sidon.

Isaskar är en stark åsna,
  som ligger i ro i sin inhägnad.
Och han såg att viloplatsen var god,
  och att landet var ljuvligt;
  då böjde han sin rygg under bördor
  och blev en arbetspliktig tjänare.

Dan skall <spärr>skaffa rätt</spärr> åt sitt folk,
  han såväl som någon av Israels stammar.
Dan skall vara en orm på vägen,
  en huggorm på stigen,
  en som biter hästen i foten,
  så att ryttaren faller baklänges av.
HERRE, jag bidar efter din frälsning!

Gad skall trängas av <spärr>skaror</spärr>,
  men själv skall han tränga dem på hälarna.

Från Aser kommer fetma, honom till mat;
  konungsliga läckerheter har han att giva.

Naftali är en snabb hind;
  han har sköna ord att giva.

Ett ungt fruktträd är Josef,
  ett ungt fruktträd vid källan;
  dess grenar nå upp över muren.
Bågskyttar oroa honom,
  de skjuta på honom och ansätta honom;
dock förbliver hans båge fast,
  och hans händer och armar spänstiga,
  genom dens händer, som är den Starke i Jakob,
  genom honom som är herden, Israels klippa,
genom din faders Gud -- han skall hjälpa dig.
  genom den Allsmäktige -- han skall välsigna dig
  med välsignelser från himmelen därovan,
  välsignelser från djupet som utbreder sig därnere,
  välsignelser från bröst och sköte.
Din faders välsignelser nå högt,
  högre än mina förfäders välsignelser,
  de nå upp till de eviga höjdernas härlighet.
  De skola komma över Josefs huvud,
  över dens hjässa, som är en furste bland sina bröder.

Benjamin är en glupande ulv;
  om morgonen förtär han rov,
  och om aftonen utskiftar han byte.╜

Alla dessa äro Israels stammar, tolv till antalet, och detta är
vad deras fader talade till dem, när han välsignade dem; åt var
och en av dem gav han sin särskilda välsignelse.

Och han bjöd dem och sade till dem: ╜Jag skall nu samlas till
mitt folk; begraven mig bredvid mina fäder, i grottan på hetiten
Efrons åker,
i den grotta som ligger på åkern i Makpela, gent emot Mamre, i
Kanaans land, den åker som Abraham köpte till egen grav av
hetiten Efron,
där de hava begravit Abraham och hans hustru Sara, där de ock
hava begravit Isak och hans hustru Rebecka, och där jag själv
har begravit Lea,
på den åkern som jämte grottan där köptes av Hets barn.╜
När Jakob hade givit sina söner denna befallning, drog han sina
fötter upp i sängen; och han gav upp andan och blev samlad till
sina fäder.

Då föll Josef ned över sin faders ansikte och grät över honom
och kysste honom.
Och Josef bjöd läkarna som han hade i sin tjänst att de skulle
balsamera hans fader; och läkarna balsamerade Israel.
Därtill åtgingo fyrtio dagar; så många dagar åtgå nämligen för
balsamering.  Och egyptierna begräto honom i sjuttio dagar.

Men när gråtodagarna efter honom voro förbi, talade Josef till
Faraos husfolk och sade: ╜Om jag har funnit nåd för edra ögon,
så framfören till Farao dessa mina ord:
Min fader har tagit en ed av mig och sagt: 'När jag är död,
begrav mig då i den grav som jag har låtit gräva åt mig i
Kanaans land.'  Så låt mig nu fara ditupp och begrava min fader;
sedan skall jag komma tillbaka igen.╜
Farao svarade: ╜Far ditupp och begrav din fader, efter den ed
som han har tagit av dig.╜
Då for Josef upp för att begrava sin fader, och med honom foro
alla Faraos tjänare, de äldste i hans hus och alla de äldste i
Egyptens land,
därtill allt Josefs husfolk och hans bröder och hans faders
husfolk; allenast sina kvinnor och barn, och sina får och
fäkreatur lämnade de kvar i landet Gosen.
Och med honom foro ditupp både vagnar och ryttare; och det var
en mycket stor skara.
När de nu kommo till Goren-Haatad, på andra sidan Jordan, höllo
de där en mycket stor och högtidlig dödsklagan, och han
anställde en sorgefest efter sin fader i sju dagar.
Och när landets inbyggare, kananéerna, sågo sorgefesten i
Goren-Haatad, sade de: ╜Det är en högtidlig
<spärr>sorgefest</spärr> som <spärr>egyptierna</spärr> här
hålla.╜  Därav fick stället namnet Abel-Misraim; det ligger på
andra sidan Jordan.

Och hans söner gjorde med honom såsom han hade bjudit dem:
hans söner förde honom till Kanaans land och begrovo honom i
grottan på åkern i Makpela, den åker som Abraham hade köpt till
egen grav av hetiten Efron, gent emot Mamre.
Och sedan Josef hade begravit sin fader, vände han tillbaka till
Egypten med sina bröder och alla dem som hade farit upp med
honom för att begrava hans fader.

Men när Josefs bröder sågo att deras fader var död, tänkte de:
╜Kanhända skall Josef nu bliva hätsk mot oss och vedergälla oss
allt det onda som vi hava gjort mot honom.╜
Därför sände de bud till Josef och läto säga: ╜Din fader bjöd
oss så före sin död:
'Så skolen I säga till Josef: Käre, förlåt dina bröder vad de
hava brutit och syndat, i det att de hava handlat så illa mot
dig.'  Förlåt alltså nu din faders Guds tjänare vad de hava
brutit.╜  Och Josef grät, när de läto säga detta till honom.
Sedan kommo ock hans bröder själva och föllo ned för honom och
sade: ╜Se, vi vilja vara tjänare åt dig.╜
Men Josef sade till dem: ╜Frukten icke.  Hållen I då mig för
Gud?
I tänkten ont mot mig, men Gud har tänkt det till godo, för att
låta det ske, som nu har skett, och så behålla mycket folk vid
liv.
Frukten därför nu icke; jag skall försörja eder och edra kvinnor
och barn.╜  Och han tröstade dem och talade vänligt med dem.

Och Josef bodde kvar i Egypten med sin faders hus; och Josef
blev ett hundra tio år gammal.
Och Josef fick se Efraims barn till tredje led; också av Makir,
Manasses son, föddes barn i Josefs sköte.
Och Josef sade till sina bröder: ╜Jag dör, men Gud skall
förvisso se till eder, och föra eder upp från detta land till
det land som han med ed har lovat åt Abraham, Isak och Jakob.╜
Och Josef tog en ed av Israels barn och sade: ╜När nu Gud ser
till eder, fören då mina ben härifrån.╜
Och Josef dog, när han var ett hundra tio år gammal.  Och man
balsamerade honom, och han lades i en kista, i Egypten.
